SOURCE_URL: https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/H-6/20140401/P1TT3xt3.html
VERSION: point-in-time consolidation "From 2014-04-01 to 2014-06-25" (Justice Laws Website) -- the last point-in-time version before the repeal of s. 13 by SC 2013, c 37, s. 2, which came into force 26 June 2014 (the Justice Laws Previous-Versions index shows the very next point-in-time entry running "From 2014-06-26 to 2014-10-31", confirming the repeal date). This version therefore shows s. 13 as it read immediately before repeal.
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-23
SCOPE: s. 2 (purpose); s. 13 in full (subsections (1)-(3), the hate-messages discriminatory practice, before repeal); s. 54 in full (subsections (1), (1.1) and (2), the remedial/order provision specific to a substantiated s. 13 complaint, including the penalty cap and the factors the Tribunal had to weigh in deciding whether to order it).
GAPS: none.
---

Marginal note: Purpose of Act
2 The purpose of this Act is to extend the laws in Canada to give effect, within the purview of matters coming within the legislative authority of Parliament, to the principle that all individuals should have an opportunity equal with other individuals to make for themselves the lives that they are able and wish to have and to have their needs accommodated, consistent with their duties and obligations as members of society, without being hindered in or prevented from doing so by discriminatory practices based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, disability or conviction for an offence for which a pardon has been granted or in respect of which a record suspension has been ordered.

Marginal note: Hate messages
13 (1) It is a discriminatory practice for a person or a group of persons acting in concert to communicate telephonically or to cause to be so communicated, repeatedly, in whole or in part by means of the facilities of a telecommunication undertaking within the legislative authority of Parliament, any matter that is likely to expose a person or persons to hatred or contempt by reason of the fact that that person or those persons are identifiable on the basis of a prohibited ground of discrimination.
Marginal note: Interpretation
(2) For greater certainty, subsection (1) applies in respect of a matter that is communicated by means of a computer or a group of interconnected or related computers, including the Internet, or any similar means of communication, but does not apply in respect of a matter that is communicated in whole or in part by means of the facilities of a broadcasting undertaking.
Marginal note: Interpretation
(3) For the purposes of this section, no owner or operator of a telecommunication undertaking communicates or causes to be communicated any matter described in subsection (1) by reason only that the facilities of a telecommunication undertaking owned or operated by that person are used by other persons for the transmission of that matter.
R.S., 1985, c. H-6, s. 13
2001, c. 41, s. 88

Marginal note: Orders relating to hate messages
54 (1) If a member or panel finds that a complaint related to a discriminatory practice described in section 13 is substantiated, the member or panel may make only one or more of the following orders:
(a) an order containing terms referred to in paragraph 53(2)(a);
(b) an order under subsection 53(3) to compensate a victim specifically identified in the communication that constituted the discriminatory practice; and
(c) an order to pay a penalty of not more than ten thousand dollars.
Marginal note: Factors
(1.1) In deciding whether to order the person to pay the penalty, the member or panel shall take into account the following factors:
(a) the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the discriminatory practice; and
(b) the wilfulness or intent of the person who engaged in the discriminatory practice, any prior discriminatory practices that the person has engaged in and the person's ability to pay the penalty.
Marginal note: Idem
(2) No order under subsection 53(2) may contain a term
(a) requiring the removal of an individual from a position if that individual accepted employment in that position in good faith; or
(b) requiring the expulsion of an occupant from any premises or accommodation, if that occupant obtained such premises or accommodation in good faith.
R.S., 1985, c. H-6, s. 54
1998, c. 9, s. 28
