SOURCE_URL: https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/I-2.5/20061212/P1TT3xt3.html
VERSION: point-in-time consolidation "From 2006-12-12 to 2008-02-21" (Justice Laws Website) -- the version in force before Charkaoui v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2007 SCC 9 (decided 23 February 2007), and before it was legislatively amended by SC 2008, c 3 (the next point-in-time entry on the Previous-Versions index begins 2008-02-22, i.e. immediately after this version's end date, confirming the 2008 amendments post-date this text). Charkaoui struck down parts of the security-certificate scheme as unconstitutional but did not itself amend the statute text; the wording below is what the Act said both immediately before and at the time of that decision.
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-23
SCOPE: s. 3(1)(h)-(i) and s. 3(2)(g) (the immigration- and refugee-objectives paragraphs bearing on security; the rest of s. 3's objectives list, which does not concern security, is omitted); ss. 76-85 in full (the Division 9 security-certificate regime: definitions, referral of the certificate, judicial consideration procedure, suspension for a protection application, the reasonableness determination, effect of a reasonable certificate, detention, and the inconsistency-resolution provision).
GAPS: none for ss. 76-85. For s. 3, only the security-relevant paragraphs were extracted per the task's instruction ("only the paragraphs relevant to security"); the remaining, non-security paragraphs of s. 3(1) and s. 3(2) were read but are not reproduced here.
---

Marginal note: Objectives -- immigration
3 (1) The objectives of this Act with respect to immigration are
...
(h) to protect the health and safety of Canadians and to maintain the security of Canadian society; and
(i) to promote international justice and security by fostering respect for human rights and by denying access to Canadian territory to persons who are criminals or security risks; and
Marginal note: Objectives -- refugees
(2) The objectives of this Act with respect to refugees are
...
(g) to protect the health and safety of Canadians and to maintain the security of Canadian society; and
[remaining, non-security paragraphs of s. 3(1) and s. 3(2) omitted per task scope]

DIVISION 9 Protection of Information

Examination on Request by the Minister and the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness

Marginal note: Definitions
76 The definitions in this section apply in this Division.
information / renseignements
information means security or criminal intelligence information and information that is obtained in confidence from a source in Canada, from the government of a foreign state, from an international organization of states or from an institution of either of them. ( renseignements )
judge / juge
judge means the Chief Justice of the Federal Court or a judge of that Court designated by the Chief Justice. ( juge )

Marginal note: Referral of certificate
77 (1) The Minister and the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness shall sign a certificate stating that a permanent resident or a foreign national is inadmissible on grounds of security, violating human or international rights, serious criminality or organized criminality and refer it to the Federal Court, which shall make a determination under section 80.
Marginal note: Effect of referral
(2) When the certificate is referred, a proceeding under this Act respecting the person named in the certificate, other than an application under subsection 112(1), may not be commenced and, if commenced, must be adjourned, until the judge makes the determination.

Marginal note: Judicial consideration
78 The following provisions govern the determination:
(a) the judge shall hear the matter;
(b) the judge shall ensure the confidentiality of the information on which the certificate is based and of any other evidence that may be provided to the judge if, in the opinion of the judge, its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person;
(c) the judge shall deal with all matters as informally and expeditiously as the circumstances and considerations of fairness and natural justice permit;
(d) the judge shall examine the information and any other evidence in private within seven days after the referral of the certificate for determination;
(e) on each request of the Minister or the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness made at any time during the proceedings, the judge shall hear all or part of the information or evidence in the absence of the permanent resident or the foreign national named in the certificate and their counsel if, in the opinion of the judge, its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person;
(f) the information or evidence described in paragraph (e) shall be returned to the Minister and the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness and shall not be considered by the judge in deciding whether the certificate is reasonable if either the matter is withdrawn or if the judge determines that the information or evidence is not relevant or, if it is relevant, that it should be part of the summary;
(g) the information or evidence described in paragraph (e) shall not be included in the summary but may be considered by the judge in deciding whether the certificate is reasonable if the judge determines that the information or evidence is relevant but that its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person;
(h) the judge shall provide the permanent resident or the foreign national with a summary of the information or evidence that enables them to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the certificate, but that does not include anything that in the opinion of the judge would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person if disclosed;
(i) the judge shall provide the permanent resident or the foreign national with an opportunity to be heard regarding their inadmissibility; and
(j) the judge may receive into evidence anything that, in the opinion of the judge, is appropriate, even if it is inadmissible in a court of law, and may base the decision on that evidence.

Marginal note: Proceedings suspended
79 (1) On the request of the Minister, the permanent resident or the foreign national, a judge shall suspend a proceeding with respect to a certificate in order for the Minister to decide an application for protection made under subsection 112(1).
Marginal note: Proceedings resumed
(2) If a proceeding is suspended under subsection (1) and the application for protection is decided, the Minister shall give notice of the decision to the permanent resident or the foreign national and to the judge, the judge shall resume the proceeding and the judge shall review the lawfulness of the decision of the Minister, taking into account the grounds referred to in subsection 18.1(4) of the Federal Courts Act .

Marginal note: Determination that certificate is reasonable
80 (1) The judge shall, on the basis of the information and evidence available, determine whether the certificate is reasonable and whether the decision on the application for protection, if any, is lawfully made.
Marginal note: Determination that certificate is not reasonable
(2) The judge shall quash a certificate if the judge is of the opinion that it is not reasonable. If the judge does not quash the certificate but determines that the decision on the application for protection is not lawfully made, the judge shall quash the decision and suspend the proceeding to allow the Minister to make a decision on the application for protection.
Marginal note: Determination not reviewable
(3) The determination of the judge is final and may not be appealed or judicially reviewed.

Marginal note: Effect of determination -- removal order
81 If a certificate is determined to be reasonable under subsection 80(1),
(a) it is conclusive proof that the permanent resident or the foreign national named in it is inadmissible;
(b) it is a removal order that may not be appealed against and that is in force without the necessity of holding or continuing an examination or an admissibility hearing; and
(c) the person named in it may not apply for protection under subsection 112(1).

Detention

Marginal note: Detention of permanent resident
82 (1) The Minister and the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness may issue a warrant for the arrest and detention of a permanent resident who is named in a certificate described in subsection 77(1) if they have reasonable grounds to believe that the permanent resident is a danger to national security or to the safety of any person or is unlikely to appear at a proceeding or for removal.
Marginal note: Mandatory detention
(2) A foreign national who is named in a certificate described in subsection 77(1) shall be detained without the issue of a warrant.

Marginal note: Review of decision for detention
83 (1) Not later than 48 hours after the beginning of detention of a permanent resident under section 82, a judge shall commence a review of the reasons for the continued detention. Section 78 applies with respect to the review, with any modifications that the circumstances require.
Marginal note: Further reviews
(2) The permanent resident must, until a determination is made under subsection 80(1), be brought back before a judge at least once in the six-month period following each preceding review and at any other times that the judge may authorize.
Marginal note: Order for continuation
(3) A judge shall order the detention to be continued if satisfied that the permanent resident continues to be a danger to national security or to the safety of any person, or is unlikely to appear at a proceeding or for removal.

Marginal note: Release
84 (1) The Minister may, on application by a permanent resident or a foreign national, order their release from detention to permit their departure from Canada.
Marginal note: Judicial release
(2) A judge may, on application by a foreign national who has not been removed from Canada within 120 days after the Federal Court determines a certificate to be reasonable, order the foreign national's release from detention, under terms and conditions that the judge considers appropriate, if satisfied that the foreign national will not be removed from Canada within a reasonable time and that the release will not pose a danger to national security or to the safety of any person.

Marginal note: Inconsistency
85 In the case of an inconsistency between sections 82 to 84 and the provisions of Division 6, sections 82 to 84 prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
