SOURCE_URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20260913083926id_/https://bylaws.vancouver.ca/2849c.PDF
VERSION: Street and Traffic By-law No. 2849, consolidated to 19 May 2026 (By-law No. 14704); fetched through the Wayback Machine because bylaws.vancouver.ca blocks automated requests
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-09
SCOPE: Whole by-law: ss. 1-105, Parts I-III, and the schedules.
GAPS: none within the scope stated. Converted from the official HTML or PDF to plain text; web-page controls, running page headers, page numbers and form feeds removed; amendment-history lines and editor notes kept.
---
STREET AND TRAFFIC BY-LAW NO. 2849

         This By-law is printed under and
          by authority of the Council of
              the City of Vancouver

        (Consolidated for convenience only
                 to May 19, 2026)
                                     BY-LAW NO. 2849

                    A By-law to Regulate Traffic and the Use of Streets
                                 in the City of Vancouver

                           [Consolidated for convenience only,
                         amended to including By-law No. 14704
                                 effective May 19, 2026]
                       ______________________________________

        The Council of the City of Vancouver, in open meeting assembled, enacts as
follows:

1.    This by-law may be cited as the "Street and Traffic By-law".

2.    This by-law is divided into three parts, dealing with the following subjects:

      Part I--Regulating Traffic.
      Part II--Regulating Use of Streets.
      Part III--Regulating Size and Weight of Vehicles.

                                        DEFINITIONS

3.    In this By-law, and unless the context otherwise requires:

      "Accessible Passenger Directed Vehicles" has the same meaning as in the
      Passenger Transportation Act.

      "A dolly" means a trailer converter dolly that is towed from a single hitch located on
      the centre line of the towing vehicle.

      "A train" means a combination of vehicles composed of a truck tractor, a semi-
      trailer and either:

              (a)      an A dolly and a semi-trailer, or
              (b)      a full trailer.

      "Axle" means a structure in the same or approximately the same transverse plane
      supported by wheels and on or with which such wheels revolve.

      "Axle Load" means the total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose
      centres are included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 106
      centimetres apart extending across the full width of the vehicle.

      "Axle Unit" means a single axle, a tandem axle, a tridem axle, or a similar group of
      axles.

      "B train" means a combination of vehicles composed of a truck tractor and a semi-

    trailer, followed by another semi-trailer attached to the first semi-trailer by means of
    a fifth wheel coupler mounted on the first semi-trailer, within the axle spread of the
    first semi-trailer or not located more than 0.3 m behind the centre of the last axle.

    "BC Transit Bus" means a vehicle for hire operated by British Columbia Transit or
    its successor and used for the transportation of passengers.

    “Bicycle Lane Buffer” means a measure to physically separate and protect a
    bicycle lane from motor vehicle traffic, including curbs, planters, landscaping,
    parking, bollards or similar measures.

    “Block” means the lateral part of street between two intersections, which do not
    involve a lane.

    "Boulevard" means:

             (a)       on a street with curbs, the portion of street between the outside curb
                       and the adjoining property line, and

             (b)       on a street without curbs, the portion of street between the edge of
                       the roadway and the adjoining property line,

    and on a street where traffic is separated by means of a median, includes the
    median.

    "Boulevard Crossing" means that portion of a boulevard permanently improved or
    designed for the passage of vehicular traffic.

    "Bus" means a motor vehicle having a seating capacity of more than 12 persons,
    including the driver, that is operated for hire or for public transportation.

"Bus Stop" means an area on a street for the stopping of buses only that

       (a)         is delineated by 2 signs, or
       (b)         extends 36 metres from and in the direction indicated on 1 sign, or
       (c)         is within 36 metres of the approach side and within 8 metres of the
                   departure side of a sign which identifies a location where buses stop to
                   load or unload passengers.

"C converter dolly" means a trailer converter dolly that has a rigid frame in the
horizontal plane and is towed from 2 hitches located in a horizontal transverse line on
the towing unit, which preclude any rotation in the horizontal plane about the hitch
points, and that satisfy all requirements of the Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Standards
applicable to such devices.

"C dolly" means a trailer converter dolly which is not an A dolly.

"C train" means a combination of vehicles composed of a truck tractor and a semi-
trailer, followed by another semi-trailer attached to the first semi-trailer by the means of a
C dolly or C converter dolly.

"Chain" means a chain, nylon strap or cable having a breaking strength of at least 3,000
kilograms.

"City Engineer" means the City Engineer appointed by Council under section 288 of the
Vancouver Charter and for the purposes of section 161 of the Vancouver Charter, the
City Engineer is deemed to be a committee.

"Chief Constable" means the Chief Constable of the City for the time being.

"Combination of Vehicles" means a combination of motor vehicle and trailer, motor
vehicle and semi-trailer, or motor vehicle, semi-trailer and trailer.

"Commercial Loading Zone" means an area or space on a roadway to be used
exclusively by commercial vehicles displaying a valid permit obtained under section 21.6
or 21.6A.

"Commercially Used Property" means real property used in whole or in part for
commercial or industrial purposes, but does not include a parking lot ancillary to property
used only for residential purposes.

"Commercial Vehicle" means a vehicle defined as such and licensed under the
Commercial Transport Act (BC), or a vehicle not so licensed but used for the collection
or delivery, or both, of merchandise or another commodity in the ordinary course of a
business.

"Consulate" means any consulate which is identified as such in the current edition of
Diplomatic, Consular and Other Representatives in Canada, published by Foreign Affairs
and International Trade Canada.

"Container" means a waste container, storage container, or construction trailer that is
not a vehicle.

"Corner Clearance Parking Area" means an area on a street adjacent to the curb
located between a crosswalk and the nearest area available for vehicle parking that is
not specifically signed for motorcycle and motor assisted cycle parking, and that the City
Engineer has marked and signed for motorcycle parking and motor assisted cycle
parking or has installed bicycle racks for bicycle parking.

"Council" means the Council of the City of Vancouver.

"Crosswalk" means:

       (a)     the portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere that is marked for
               pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the road surface or by a
               sign; or

       (b)     at an intersection or elsewhere that is not marked for pedestrian crossing
               by lines or other markings on the road surface or by a sign, means the
               portion of a roadway between the extension of the lateral edge of the
               roadway and the adjacent lateral property line, but does not include lane
               intersections.

"Custom Transit Vehicle" means a vehicle used primarily for the transport of physically
disabled persons, operated by an agency approved by the government authorities
responsible for providing transit services for physically disabled persons, and identified
in a manner specified by the City Engineer.

"Downtown" means the area generally shown within the heavy black outline on the
diagram below, but specifically described as that area bounded by the west property line
of Main Street from Burrard Inlet to National Avenue; the projection

westward of the north property of National Avenue from Main Street to False Creek; the
north shoreline of False Creek from National Avenue to the extension southward of the
west property line of Burrard Street; the west property line of Burrard Street from False
Creek to Robson Street, the south property line of Robson Street from Burrard Street to
Denman Street, the west property line of Denman Street from Robson Street to Georgia
Street; the south property line of Georgia Street from Denman Street to Chilco Street,
the east property line of Chilco Street and its extension north from Georgia Street to
Burrard Inlet; Burrard Inlet from Chilco Street to Main Street.

"Drive" means to drive, operate, propel, or otherwise control a vehicle.

"Driver" means a person who drives, operates, propels or otherwise controls a vehicle.

“Electric Kick Scooter” has the meaning set out in the “Electric Kick Scooter Pilot
Project Regulation” effective April 5, 2024.

“Elephants’ feet markings” means a series of white painted squares that delineate a
crosswalk where cycling is permitted.

“Emergency Vehicle" means any vehicle of a fire department, a police department, an
ambulance service or a vehicle driven by a sheriff in the discharge of a sheriff’s duties
under the Sheriff Act, and includes any other vehicle designated as such by the Chief
Constable.

“Existing West End Permit Holder" means a residential parking permit holder in the
Denman West, West End Plateau or Davie-Beach areas who held a residential parking
permit valid in any of those areas before August 31, 2017, and has not allowed it to
lapse for more than 90 consecutive days since that date.

"Garbage Container" means a receptacle with a minimum capacity of 1 (one) cubic
yard used or intended to be used for the temporary storage of refuse.

"Intersection" means the area created by the extension of the lateral lines of roadways
which join one another, whether such roadways at the junction cross each other or meet
at an angle without crossing each other.

"Jaywalk" means to walk across a roadway, other than a lane, a minor street or a
portion of a street designated by the City Engineer for the exclusive use of cyclists, at
any place that is not a marked or unmarked crosswalk and is less than one block from
an intersection where there are traffic control signals.

"Lane" means any street not more than 10.06 metres in width.

"Loading Zone" means the area or space on a roadway established for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of materials or passengers

“Long-Term West End Resident Permit Holder” means a residential parking permit
holder who has continuously lived in the Denman West, West End Plateau or Davie-
Beach areas since August 31, 2017, has not allowed the permit to lapse for more than
90 consecutive days since it was obtained, and has not been an existing West End
permit holder.

"Low Income Permit Holder" means a residential parking permit holder in the Denman
West, West End Plateau or Davie-Beach areas who is qualified to enrol in the
Vancouver Park Board’s Leisure Access Program, or a substantially similar program.

"Median" means an area that is painted, curbed or raised and is located between traffic
lanes to separate vehicles travelling in opposite directions.

"Metro Core" means area west of Clark Drive, north of 16th Avenue, east of Burrard
Street, and south of Burrard Inlet.

"Minor Street" means the roadway, but not the sidewalk or boulevard portion, of a
street that does not have lane lines or directional dividing lines.

”Motor Assisted Cycle” means a motor assisted cycle as defined in the Motor Vehicle
Act.

"Motor Vehicle" means a vehicle which is self-propelled or propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead wires, but does not include a motorized wheelchair or a vehicle
operated upon rails or tracks.

"Motorcycle" means a two wheeled self-propelled vehicle.

"Neighbourhood Zero Emission Vehicle" means a vehicle that travels on four wheels
and is powered by an electric motor that is designed to allow the vehicle to attain a
speed of 32 kilometres per hour but not more than 40 kilometres per hour in a distance
of 1.6 km on a paved level surface, and

       (a)    meets or exceeds standards of the Motor Vehicle Safety Act (Canada) for
              a low-speed vehicle and bears a compliance label for a low-speed vehicle
              in accordance with that Act, or

       (b)    if imported to Canada, has been imported as an admissible low-speed
              vehicle in accordance with the Motor Vehicle Safety Act (Canada)
              requirements and

              (i)    bears a compliance label for a low-speed vehicle in accordance
                     with that Act, or

              (ii)   meets applicable federal United States laws in accordance with
                     the Motor Vehicle Safety Act (Canada).

"New Permit Holder" means a residential parking permit holder in the Denman West,
West End Plateau or Davie-Beach areas who was not a permit holder on August 31,
2017 and obtains a permit after that date.

"One-way Shared Vehicle Service" means a shared vehicle system that allows its
members to begin and end their rental periods at any lawful and authorized space within
the operating area of the shared vehicle organization.

"One-way Street" means a street designated by sign for the movement of vehicular
traffic in one direction only.

"Park" when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.

"Park Board" means the Board of Parks and Recreation of the City of Vancouver.

"Passenger Zone" means the area or space on a roadway established for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.

"Pedestrian" means a person on foot or in a wheelchair, whether motorized or not.

"Plaza" means a street, including the roadway and boulevard, that is designated as a
plaza in Schedule G of this By-law.

"Police Officer" means a peace officer or constable as provided under the Police Act
employed by the Vancouver Police Board.

“Priority Congestion Management Roadway” means any street or part of a street
where stopping is otherwise permitted but is specifically prohibited at any time between
the hours of 7:00 am and 7:00 pm, and any street designated in Schedule H.

"Private Road" means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular
travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner.

"Private Vehicle" means any motor vehicle other than a commercial vehicle.

"Property Line" means the legal boundary between a street and the parcels of land
abutting thereon.

“Protected Bicycle Lane" means that a part of a roadway or path which is separated
from motor vehicle traffic by a bicycle lane buffer and is designated by the City Engineer
for use by persons on bicycles, non-motorized skates, skateboards, electric kick
scooters or push scooters.

"Public Park" means any public park and any other area which is in the possession,
jurisdiction and control of the Board of Parks and Recreation.

“Quadricycle” means a 4-wheeled device that is propelled by human power and on
which a person may ride, and that:

(a)    has a track width of not less than 1 metre,

(b)    has a rear track width that is greater than the height of the seat frame as
       measured from level ground to the seat frame,

(c)    is equipped with at least 2 sets of pedals for motive power,

(d)    is equipped with disc or drum brakes, and

(e)    is controlled by a single operator.

"Right-of-Way" means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.

"Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or intended for vehicular
use.

"Seawall" means a way normally open to the use of the public that is adjacent or close
to a body of water.

"Semi-Trailer" means a vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying

persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that
some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.

 "Service Vehicle" means a vehicle used to service a facility owned, operated or
maintained by a public authority or a public utility, and includes a vehicle displaying a
card or decal issued by the City or the Park Board identifying it as such.

"Shared Vehicle" means a four-wheeled automobile, van, or pick-up truck owned and
operated by a shared vehicle organization;

"Shared Vehicle Organization" means a legal entity whose principal business objective
is to provide its members, for a fee, with a car-sharing service by which such members
have access to a fleet of shared vehicles which they may reserve for use on an hourly
basis, and which the City Engineer has approved.

"Sidewalk" means the portion of a street, improved for the use of pedestrians, between
the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines.

"Sidewalk Crossing" means that portion of a sidewalk permanently improved or
designed for the passage or entry of vehicular traffic.

"Sign" means a notice authorized or erected by the City Engineer.

"Sound Truck" means a vehicle containing or carrying a device external to the
passenger compartment from which advertising or entertainment is made or highlighted
by sound, or from which a public address is made.

"Stop" means:

       (a)    when required, a complete cessation from movement; and

       (b)    when prohibited, the stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
              or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to
              comply with the directions of a Police Officer or a Traffic-control Signal or
              a Traffic Sign.

"Stopping" when prohibited means the coming to rest or the state of being at rest of a
vehicle.

"Street" includes public road, highway, bridge, viaduct, lane and sidewalk, and any
other way normally open to the use of the public, but does not include a private right-of-
way on private property.

"Street Furniture" includes waste receptacles, benches, bus shelters, traffic signs and
any similar work, structure or equipment.

"Structure" in sections 71A, 71B, 71F, and 85A of this By-law means something that is
built, constructed or assembled and that is placed on a street permanently, semi-
permanently or for a specified period of time.

"Table" in Section 71E of this By-law means an article of furniture supported by one or

more vertical legs and having a flat horizontal surface.

“Tour Bus” means a bus with the name and address of its operator or owner plainly
displayed in letters and figures not less than 5 cm high in a conspicuous place on both
sides of the vehicle.

"Tour Bus Zone" means an area on a street for the stopping of buses to facilitate the
loading and unloading of passengers only.

"Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street.

"Traffic Circle" means a traffic island located in the centre of an intersection.

"Traffic Island" means an area that is painted, curbed or raised between traffic lanes for
the control of vehicle movements or for pedestrian refuge.

"Traffic-control Signal" means any device, manually, electrically or mechanically
operated for the regulation of traffic, and which successively temporarily prohibits and
permits traffic movement by displaying different signal indications.

"Traffic Sign" means any sign, signal, marking or other device, painted or erected, for
the purpose of regulating traffic, but does not include a traffic control signal.

"Trailer" means a vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its
weight rests upon the towing vehicle.

"Transit Route" means any street that has been designated as a transit route by the
Council or by the City Engineer pursuant to subsection 4.(1) (d) of this by-law.

"Transportation Network Services" has the same meaning as in the Passenger
Transportation Act.

"Truck" means a motor vehicle designed or used primarily for the transportation of
property.

"Truck Route" means any street listed in Schedule B of this By-law.

"Truck Tractor" means a vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of a vehicle and
load so drawn.

"Vehicle" includes any device by which any person or property may be transported on a
roadway, irrespective of the motive power, but does not include railway cars running
upon rails.

"Zoning District" means a zoning district as established by the City’s Zoning &
Development By-law.

"Zero Emission Vehicle” means vehicles approved by the City Engineer as zero

emission vehicles.

                                         PART I

                               REGULATING TRAFFIC
                              DELEGATION OF POWERS

4.   (1)   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to:

                  (a) mark traffic lanes on streets and to designate by order streets or
                      portions of streets on which a distinguishing single line or double line
                      shall be marked, which lines need not be in the middle of the travelled
                      portion of the street;

                  (b) designate by order streets or portions of streets upon which no vehicle
                      shall be stopped or parked, or only such vehicles or classes thereof at
                      such times and upon such conditions as may be prescribed;

                  (c) locate, establish and maintain upon any streets such traffic signs,
                      stop-signs, traffic lights or reflectors, traffic discs, markers, blocks,
                      standards, indicators, traffic-control signals, or other devices or
                      apparatus, whether automatic or manual, as may be deemed
                      necessary for the regulation, direction and control of traffic on any
                      street and at any intersection; and

                  (d) designate by order streets or portions of streets as transit routes and
                      streets or portions of streets that are to be used exclusively by one or
                      more class of vehicles or traffic, and to order the installation or
                      alteration of sidewalks, boulevards, lanes, or other infrastructure or
                      devices to accommodate or facilitate such traffic or prevent any
                      prohibited traffic.

     (2)   The Chief Constable is hereby authorized to place or cause to be placed for
           periods not exceeding 30 days at any one time portable traffic signs:

           (a)    at the entrance to dance halls, funeral parlors or other places of public
                  assembly during the period of assembly therein;

           (b)    upon either or both sides of any street or portion of street along the route
                  of any parade or in the vicinity of a large public gathering;

           (c)    at any other location in order to expedite the movement of traffic or to
                  safeguard pedestrians or property.

     (3)   During the time such portable signs are in place they shall be deemed to
           supersede any provisions of this by-law or any regulations, warnings or directions
           displayed by any other traffic sign or traffic control signal.

     (4)   The General Manager of the Park Board is hereby authorized to exercise the
           same powers with respect to any street within any public park as those granted
           to the City Engineer under the provisions of subsections (1)(a), (1)(b) and (1)(c).

                            OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS

5.   Every person shall at all times comply with any lawful order, direction, signal or
     command made or given by a police officer in the performance of the officer's duty in
     directing or regulating traffic. Police officers in order to expedite the movement of traffic
     or to safeguard pedestrians or property shall have full power to direct and regulate traffic
     and in doing so may disregard any traffic-control signal or traffic sign.

                              TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS

6.   Obedience to Traffic Signs and Signals.

     Every pedestrian and the driver of every vehicle, shall obey the direction, instruction,
     limitation, restriction or prohibition of any applicable traffic sign or traffic-control signal
     unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions contained in this
     by-law respecting emergency and public utility vehicles.

7.   Traffic-Control Signal Legend.

     (1)    Whenever traffic at any intersection is alternately directed to proceed or to stop
            by the use of traffic-control signals exhibiting the words "Go", "Caution" or "Stop",
            or exhibiting coloured lights or arrows, such lights, terms and arrows shall have
            the following meaning:

            (a)     Green light or "Go", shall mean or indicate that traffic facing such signal
                    may proceed across the intersection, as herein directed (except vehicular
                    traffic which shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and vehicles
                    lawfully within the crosswalk or the intersection at the time such signal is
                    exhibited).

            (aa)    Green Light with Flashing Green Arrow, shall mean or indicate that
                    vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection to
                    make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-
                    way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully
                    using the intersection.

            (b)     Yellow light, or "Caution", when shown following the green "Go", shall
                    mean or indicate that traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
                    nearest crosswalk at the intersection unless so close to the intersection
                    that a stop cannot be made in safety.

            (c)     Red light, or "Stop", shall mean and indicate that traffic facing the signal
                    shall not proceed until the green or "Go" signal is displayed, and moving
                    traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the intersection and
                    remain standing until the green or "Go" signal is displayed. Provided
                    however, that notwithstanding the meaning ascribed to a "red light" in this
                    clause, a right turn may be made in accordance with the provisions and
                    subject to the restrictions contained in the Motor Vehicle Act or its
                    regulations.

            (d)     Red Light with Green Arrow, shall mean vehicular traffic facing such

             signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
             indicated by such arrow but shall not interfere with other traffic or
             endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk.

      (e)    "Flashing Red Light with Green Arrow" shall mean or indicate that
             vehicular traffic facing such signal may, after having first come to a full
             stop, cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
             indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
             lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
             intersection.

(2)   (a)    Whenever pedestrian-control signals are in place, exhibiting the
             outline or shape of a walking person, a pedestrian facing such signal may
             proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be
             given the right-of-way by all drivers.

      (b)    Whenever pedestrian-control signals are in place, exhibiting the outline or
             shape of a raised hand, no pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in
             the direction of such signal but any pedestrian who has commenced
             crossing the roadway while the outline or shape of a walking person was
             exhibited, may continue across the roadway and shall be given the right-
             of-way by all drivers.

(3)   Flashing Signals.

      Whenever flashing red or yellow or green signals are used they shall require
      obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:

      (a)    Flashing red (Stop signal).

             When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of
             vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
             intersection or at a limit line when marked, and the right to proceed shall
             be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.

      (b)    Flashing yellow (Caution signal).

             When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of
             vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only
             with caution.

      (c)    Flashing green (Alerting signal).

             When a green lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of
             vehicles may proceed through the intersection but must approach the
             nearest crosswalk in readiness to stop should a yellow light be displayed
             before the said crosswalk is reached.

(4)   Whenever traffic signals are in place above any street, exhibiting coloured arrows
      or diagonal crosses, such arrows and crosses shall have the following meaning:

             (a)     downward pointing green arrow shall mean or indicate that vehicular
                     traffic facing such signal may travel in the traffic lane over which the
                     signal is placed;

             (b)     red diagonal crosses shall mean or indicate that vehicular traffic facing
                     such signal shall not travel in the traffic lane over which such signal is
                     placed.

8.    Unauthorized Signs and Signals Prohibited.

      No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any unauthorized
      sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be, or is in imitation of or resembles
      any traffic-control signal or traffic sign, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic
      or in the parking of vehicles, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness
      of any authorized traffic-control device.

9.    Interference with Traffic-Control Devices.

      No person shall move, remove, deface, damage or alter, nor obstruct the view of, nor
      otherwise interfere with any authorized traffic-control signal or traffic sign, nor drive, nor
      walk on or over any newly painted line, the presence of which is indicated on any
      roadway by red flags, traffic cones, or other suitable warning devices.

10.   School Crossings.

      (1)    The City Engineer is authorized to designate, by way of traffic signs or other
             markings, any portion of a street as a school crossing.

      (2)    Whenever any portion of a street has been designated under subsection (1), the
             driver of every vehicle shall obey the instruction, prohibition or direction indicated
             on the traffic sign or marking, provided however that wherever the sign or
             marking is erected on a street containing a central boulevard the sign or marking
             shall govern only that portion of the school crossing which is on the same side of
             the street in which the vehicle is lawfully travelling.

      (3)    If any traffic sign placed in advance of a designated school crossing referred to in
             subsection (1) contains the words "No Passing", no driver of a vehicle shall
             overtake and pass any moving vehicle while upon that portion of the street
             between the said sign and the designated school crossing.

      (4)    Every person who is guilty of an offence against subsection (2) hereof shall be
             liable to a fine of not less than $15.00.

                            PEDESTRIAN'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES

11.          Pedestrian's Right-of-Way at Crosswalks.

      (1)    The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
             need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
             when the pedestrian:

             (a)     is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is travelling, or

             (b)     is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be
                     in danger,

             provided that no pedestrian shall leave a curb or other place of safety and walk
             or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the
             driver to yield, subject to the provisions contained in this by-law.

      (2)    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section no driver shall be
             guilty of an offence where a pedestrian is crossing the roadway within a
             crosswalk contrary to the lawful order, direction, signal or command made or
             given by a police officer in the performance of the officer's duty in directing or
             regulating traffic or contrary to the direction, instruction, limitation, restriction, or
             prohibition of any applicable traffic sign or traffic-control signal.

      (3)    No person shall start to cross any street in front of a bus which has stopped to
             load or unload passengers unless such crossing is made in compliance with
             traffic-control signals or the direction of a police officer. This provision shall not
             apply where such bus has stopped at its regular terminus.

      (4)    Whenever any vehicle has stopped or slowed down at a marked crosswalk or at
             any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, to permit a pedestrian to cross the
             roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
             overtake and pass such vehicle.

12.          Crossing at Other Than Crosswalks.

      (1)    Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
             crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall give the
             right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.

      (2)    No pedestrian shall jaywalk on a roadway.

      (3)    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a vehicle shall
             exercise due care for the safety of pedestrians and shall give warning by
             sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution

             upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a
             roadway.

13.   [Deleted]

14.   Use Right Half of Crosswalks.

      Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks.

15.   Pedestrians Soliciting Rides.

      No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of

       any vehicle except a public passenger conveyance.

16.    Pedestrians Giving Names to Police Officers.

       (1)    [Deleted]

       (2)    Any police officer is authorized to arrest without warrant any pedestrian whom
              such police officer finds committing a breach of any provisions of this by-law, if
              such pedestrian shall fail to stop and state correctly his or her name and address
              when so requested by such police officer.

                            STOPPING AND PARKING - STREETS

17.1   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stop at any place where a traffic sign prohibits stopping:

              (a) wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or area is in the
                  vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day
                  on which school is regularly held; or

              (b) at any other time.

17.2   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stop:

              (a)    within 6 metres of the approach side of a stop sign:

                     (i)     wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or
                             area is in the vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
                             and 5:00 p.m. of any day on which school is regularly held, or
                     (ii)    at any other time;

              (b)    within 6 metres of a firehall on that side of the street on which the firehall
                     is located, or within 25 metres of a firehall on the opposite side of the
                     street on which the firehall is located, unless otherwise restricted by a
                     traffic sign;

              (c)    within 5 metres of a fire hydrant, measured either side from the point at
                     the curb or edge of the roadway which is closest to the hydrant;

              (d)    in front of or within 1.5 metres of the nearest side of a private road,
                     boulevard crossing or sidewalk crossing:

                     (i)     wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or
                             area is in the vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
                             and 5:00 p.m. of any day on which school is regularly held, or
                     (ii)    at any other time;

              (e)    in front of or within 1.5 metres of a garbage container;

              (f)    alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction where to do so

                     would obstruct the movement of traffic;

              (g)    on any bridge, viaduct or elevated structure forming part of a street
                     except:

                     (i)     for the Hastings Viaduct;

                     (ii)    where traffic signs indicate that parking or stopping is permitted; or

                     (iii)   where parking meters indicate that parking is permitted;

              (h)    alongside a median, traffic island or traffic circle;

              (i)    on any roadway bounded by curbs where the roadway is 5 metres or less
                     in width;

              (j)    on any portion of street indicated by a sign or other marker as reserved
                     for one or more class of vehicle, except for recognized vehicles of that
                     class;

              (k)    on any street or portion of a street designated as a priority congestion
                     management roadway during the times stopping is prohibited, as
                     indicated on any traffic sign governing that street or portion of the street;

              (l)    on any portion of a street that is designated for use by persons on
                     bicycles, non-motorized skates, skateboards, or push scooters;

              (m)    on any portion of a street that is designated for parking use by vehicles
                     displaying a disabled person’s parking placard authorized by the city.

17.3   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stop on any portion of a street designated as a bus stop unless the
       vehicle is a BC Transit Bus or a bus operated by a person permitted by the City Engineer
       to use a bus stop.

17.4   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stop:

              (a)    on a crosswalk;

              (b)    within 6 metres of either side of a crosswalk, except for the driver of a
                     motorcycle or motor assisted cycle who is parking in a clearance parking
                     area or a bicycle rider parking at a bicycle rack;

              (c)    on a sidewalk;

              (d)    on a sidewalk crossing;

              (e)    on a boulevard, traffic island or traffic circle except where specifically

                    designated for the parking of motor vehicles:

                    (i)    wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or
                           area is in the vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
                           and 5:00 p.m. of any day on which school is regularly held, or
                    (ii)   at any other time;

             (f)    within an intersection:

                    (i)    wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or
                           area is in the vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
                           and 5:00 p.m. of any day on which school is regularly held, or
                    (ii)   at any other time.

17.5   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stop on a street, not being a lane:

             (a)    within 1.5 metres of that portion of an intersecting lane that is useable for
                    travel:

                    (i)    wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or
                           area is in the vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
                           and 5:00 p.m. of any day on which school is regularly held, or
                    (ii)   at any other time;

             (b)    within 2 metres of the approach side of the nearest edge of the closest
                    sidewalk on an intersecting street;

             (c)    within 6 metres of the nearest edge of the closest sidewalk on an
                    intersecting street:

                    (i)    wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or
                           area is in the vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
                           and 5:00 p.m. of any day on which school is regularly held, or
                    (ii)   at any other time;

             (d)    within 9 metres of the nearest edge of the pavement on an intersecting
                    street where no sidewalk exists:

                    (i)    wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or
                           area is in the vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
                           and 5:00 p.m. of any day on which school is regularly held, or
                    (ii)   at any other time.

17.6   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to park:

             (a)    at any place on a street where a traffic sign prohibits parking;

             (b)    at any place on a street where a traffic sign restricts parking, except in
                    accordance with such restriction;

             (c)    on the paved portion of any curbless street where the pavement is 6
                    metres or less in width, so as to leave available less than 3 metres of the
                    usable paved portion of such street;

             (d)    opposite to or in such close proximity to another vehicle already stopped
                    on the street as to obstruct or unduly restrict the free movement of
                    vehicles on the street;

             (e)    on any portion of a street for a longer period of time than indicated on any
                    traffic sign governing that portion of a street;

             (f)    on a street abutting premises used for residential or commercial purposes
                    for more than 3 hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., provided that this
                    limitation in time shall not apply where:

                    (i)     the premises are on the same block as the property or residence
                            of the person;

                    (ii)    the person is an employee of the business or other enterprise
                            operating at the premises;

                    (iii)   the street or portion of street is restricted to the parking of vehicles
                            of residents of that street;

                    (iv)    the street or portion of street is restricted to the parking of vehicles
                            of residents bearing a valid decal issued by the City Engineer and
                            authorizing its parking provided that the vehicle is located within
                            the area named on the decal and provided further that where the
                            area is regulated pursuant to section 22.1 this subclause (iii) shall
                            only apply during the time of the event;

                    (v)     the driver of a motorcycle or motor assisted cycle, or a rider of a
                            bicycle parks in a clearance parking area, in which case a 24 hour
                            time limit is to apply; or

                    (vi)    the driver of a shared vehicle displaying a valid permit issued
                            under section 23.2, in which case no time limit is to apply;

             (g)    on that part of any roadway within a distance of 6 metres on both sides of
                    the centre of the main entrance or exterior vestibule of any hotel or
                    theatre, unless otherwise marked by traffic signs.

17.6A Despite section 17.6, a person may:

             (a)    park a vehicle, for no more than five minutes, while loading or unloading
                    persons or materials; and

             (b)    despite subsection (a), park a custom transit vehicle or a vehicle that
                    displays a disabled person’s parking placard authorized by the city, for no
                    more than 30 minutes, while loading or unloading persons or materials.

17.7   Where a block or a portion of a block is subject to a parking regulation with a time limit,
       an owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to move from one location to another in the same block in an attempt
       to avoid the time limit.

18.1   Except as provided in section 18.2 of this by-law and section 4 of Parking Meter By-law
       2952, an owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow
       or permit that vehicle to stop or park in a roadway other than:

              (a)     parallel with the curb or edge of the roadway;

              (b)     headed in the direction of traffic:

                      (i)     wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or
                              area is in the vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
                              and 5:00 p.m. of any day on which school is regularly held, or
                      (ii)    at any other time; and

              (c)     with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 30 cm of the curb or edge of
                      the roadway, except that, where a portion of a street designated by the
                      City Engineer for the exclusive use of bicycle traffic is adjacent to the
                      roadway, the curbside wheels of the vehicle are to be within 30 cm of the
                      edge of the bicycle lane buffer that is furthest away from the nearest curb:

                      (i)     wherever signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or
                              area is in the vicinity of a school, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
                              and 5:00 p.m. of any day on which school is regularly held, or
                      (ii)    at any other time.

18.2   Notwithstanding section 18.1 of this by-law and section 4 of Parking Meter By-law 2952,
       where streets or portions of streets have been marked or signed for angle parking, an
       owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or permit
       that vehicle to park in any manner other than at the angle to the curb indicated by such
       marks or signs and parallel to and between such marks and with the front of the vehicle
       as close to the curb as practicable.

18.3   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stand unattended on any perceptible grade on any street unless
       the front or rear wheels are turned to the curb or side of the roadway.

                             STOPPING AND PARKING - LANES

19.1   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stop on a lane:

              (a)     within 2 metres of that portion of an intersecting street or lane that is
                      useable for travel;

              (b)     within 2 metres of the nearest edge of the closest sidewalk on an
                      intersecting street;

              (c)    within 5 metres of the nearest edge of the pavement on an intersecting
                     street where no sidewalk exists;

              (d)    in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
                     3 metres of the usable travelled portion of such lane for the free
                     movement of vehicles;

              (e)    opposite to or in close proximity to another vehicle already stopped in the
                     lane in such manner as to obstruct the free movement of other vehicles;

              (f)    within a rectangular area extending:

                     (i)     0.5 metres along the lane from either edge of a door, gate or
                             opening in a wall or other barrier that permits pedestrian access
                             between public and private property; and

                     (ii)    3 metres into the lane from the front of either edge of a door, gate
                             or opening in a wall or other barrier that permits pedestrian access
                             between public and private property;

              (g)    within an area extending 1.5 metres from either side of and 5.5 metres
                     directly in front of a driveway or private road adjoining such lane or the
                     vehicular access of a garage abutting such lane;

              (h)    except as provided in clause (j) on either side of a lane which abuts
                     commercially used property, except that the prohibition does not apply to
                     lanes located in the area bounded by Burrard Street, English Bay, Stanley
                     Park and Coal Harbour if the vehicle is otherwise lawfully parked;

              (i)    within the area generally shown within the heavy black outline on the
                     diagram below, but specifically described as that area bounded on the
                     north by Burrard Inlet, on the east by Gore Avenue, on the south by Prior
                     Street, False Creek and Smithe Street, and on the west by Burrard Street;

              (j)    within those areas described as "West End" and "Robson North" in
                     Schedule D to this By-law, unless the vehicle is permitted to be parked
                     there pursuant to section 23.1.

19.2   Notwithstanding the provisions of clauses (h), (i) and (j) of section 19.1, a driver of a
       commercial vehicle which has the name and address of its operator or owner plainly
       displayed in letters and figures not less than 5 cm high, and permanently

       affixed by means of high performance pressure sensitive vinyl, or reflective sheeting, or
       lettered with painted enamel, in a conspicuous place on both sides of the vehicle, and
       who obtains a permit under section 21.6A and displays that permit in accordance with
       that section, may stop the vehicle in a lane for a period not exceeding 30 minutes while
       actively engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or other commodities, or
       passengers.

                                PARKING - LARGE VEHICLES

20.1   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle which:

       (i)     has a height that exceeds 2.2 metres, or

       (ii)    has an overall length that exceeds 6.4 metres, or

       (iii)   that is designed primarily for the conveyance of passengers and has a seating
               capacity of more than 9 people

       must not cause, allow or permit that vehicle to park on a street:

       (a)     abutting premises used for business purposes for longer than 3 hours unless the
               owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of the vehicle owns or leases the
               premises or is the employee of the owner or lessee of the premises, or

       (b)     between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.

20.2   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle which:

       (i)     has a height that exceeds 2.2 metres, or

       (ii)    has an overall length that exceeds 6.4 metres, or

       (iii)   that is designed primarily for the conveyance of passengers and has a seating
               capacity of more than 9 people, or

       (iv)    has a licensed gross vehicle weight exceeding 5 500 kg

       must not cause, allow or permit that vehicle to park on a street abutting property used for
       a public park, school, church or residential purpose for longer than 3 hours between the
       hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., unless the vehicle is needed for a service call or the
       property is a construction site.

20.3   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a trailer or semi-trailer must not cause,
       allow or permit that vehicle to park on a street without the motive power unit attached in
       such a manner as to allow the safe transportation of the trailer or semi-trailer in
       accordance with the standards established in the Motor Vehicle Act.

                      RESTRICTED STOPPING AND PARKING AREAS

21.1   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stop in a passenger zone except, for no more than three minutes,
       unless otherwise permitted by a traffic sign, to load or unload passengers.

21.2   Despite section 21.1, the driver of:

       (a)     an armoured vehicle, used to convey cash and other securities, may stop in a
               passenger zone while picking up or delivering such cash or securities;

       (b)     a commercial vehicle displaying a valid permit obtained under section 21.6 or
               21.6A may stop in a passenger zone before 12:00 noon on any day, for no more
               than 30 minutes, while actively engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
               other commodities, or passengers; and

       (c)     a custom transit vehicle or a vehicle that displays a disabled person’s parking
               placard authorized by the city may stop in a passenger zone, for no more than 30
               minutes, while loading or unloading persons or materials.

21.3   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stop in a loading zone except, for no more than three minutes, to
       load or unload passengers, and, for no more than 30 minutes, to load or unload
       materials.

21.4   Despite section 21.3, the driver of a custom transit vehicle or a vehicle that displays a
       disabled person’s parking placard authorized by the city may stop in a loading zone, for
       no more than 30 minutes, while loading or unloading persons or materials.

21.5   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause, allow or
       permit that vehicle to stop in a commercial loading zone except for a commercial vehicle
       with the name and address of its operator or owner displayed as set out in section 19.2
       and the permit obtained under section 21.6A and displayed in accordance with that
       section, which may stop in a commercial loading zone while actively engaged in loading
       or unloading merchandise or other commodities, or passengers, for a period not
       exceeding 30 minutes.

21.6   If a person does not display the permanent signage referred to in section 19.2, such
       person must obtain a permit from the City Engineer for the purposes of sections 19.2,
       21.5, and 23.1D. The permit will consist of a metal plate and decal that must be kept
       securely fastened to the front of the vehicle for which it is issued at all times. The annual
       fee for the permit is $253.10, plus the following, as applicable:

                Gross Vehicle Weight Fee – Except Zero Emission Vehicles

                Up to 5,500 kilograms........................................................$100.00
                5,500 kilograms and over...................................................$300.00

                Gross Vehicle Weight Fee - Zero Emission Vehicles

                Up to 5,500 kilograms..........................................................$50.00
                5,500 kilograms and over.....................................................$150.00

       The replacement fee for a lost metal plate is $15.00, and the replacement fee for a lost
       decal is $8.00.

21.6A If a person displays the permanent signage referred to in section 19.2, such person must
      obtain a permit from the City Engineer for the purposes of sections 19.2, 21.5, and
      21.3D. The permit will consist of a decal that must be kept securely fastened to the front
      of the vehicle for which it is issued at all times. The annual fee for the permit is as
      follows:

                Gross Vehicle Weight Fee – Except Zero Emission Vehicles

                Up to 5,500 kilograms.......................................................$100.00
                5,500 kilograms and over..................................................$300.00

                Gross Vehicle Weight Fee - Zero Emission Vehicles

                Up to 5,500 kilograms..........................................................$50.00
                5,500 kilograms and over.....................................................$150.00

       The replacement fee for a lost decal is $8.00.

21.7   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle other than a tour bus must
       not cause, allow or permit that vehicle to stop in a tour bus zone, and a tour bus may

       only stop in a tour bus zone for a maximum duration of 15 minutes, unless otherwise
       permitted by a traffic sign.

21.7A An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a tour bus must not cause, allow or
      permit that tour bus to stop in the tour bus zone on Canada Place between Burrard
      Street and Howe Street unless the owner, registered owner, lessee or operator holds a
      valid Canada Place bus zone permit, in which case the tour bus may stop in the Canada
      Place tour bus zone for a maximum duration of 15 minutes, unless otherwise permitted
      by a traffic sign.

21.7B The City Engineer may issue:

       a)     a one-day permit to a tour bus that allows stopping on a day between May 1 and
              October 15 in the tour bus zone on Canada Place between Burrard Street and
              Howe Street for a fee of $25; and,

       b)     a seasonal permit to a tour bus that allows stopping on any day between May 1
              and October 15 in the tour bus zone on Canada Place between Burrard Street
              and Howe Street for a fee of $2,000.

21.8   (1)    Except for accessible passenger directed vehicles, a transportation network
              services provider must not cause, allow, or permit any passenger directed
              vehicles being operated under the license issued to them under the Passenger
              Transportation Act to stop to pick up or drop off any passengers on any city street
              within the Metro core between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless they hold a valid
              congestion and curbside management permit, in which case the passenger
              directed vehicles may stop at any place where stopping is permitted within the
              Metro core between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for the purposes of picking up or
              dropping off passengers.

       (2)    The City Engineer may issue a congestion and curbside management permit to a
              transportation network services provider for a fee of $0.25 per pick up or drop off
              within the Metro core between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for zero-emission
              vehicles, and $0.50 per pick up or drop off within the Metro core between 7:00
              a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for all other passenger directed vehicles, payable monthly at
              the end of each month in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer.

                                   EVENT PERMIT PARKING

22.1   Where an area of the City has been identified and posted with signs indicating that
       parking is prohibited during event times, vehicles which display a valid permit authorizing
       parking in that area, being in the form of either a residential decal or visitor pass, may be
       parked on streets within the area, provided all other parking restrictions are otherwise
       complied with.

22.2   Each residence fronting on a street posted as indicated in section 22.1 shall be allotted
       one resident decal for each vehicle registered to the resident's address and one visitor
       pass. Where no on-site parking is provided for a residence, an additional visitor pass
       may be allotted.

22.3   The City Engineer may determine the form of passes, signs and decals, may make

       regulations as to the period for which the permits shall be valid, how they shall be
       displayed and distributed, and such other miscellaneous regulations as may be required,
       and may issue other permits which appear appropriate.

22.4   No holder of a resident decal or visitor pass shall sell, assign or otherwise transfer that
       person's interest in the decal or pass. The bona fide use of a visitor pass shall be
       deemed not to be a sale, assignment or transfer.

                      RESIDENTIAL AND SHARED VEHICLE PARKING

23.1   If:

       (a)     the City Engineer designates any street or part of a street for the parking only of:

               (i)    vehicles belonging to residents who live in a particular area of the city,
                      and

               (ii)   shared vehicles,

               or any one or more of such classes of vehicles;

       (b)     the City Engineer identifies any such street or part of a street by posting on it
               signs indicating a prohibition on parking except for a vehicle that displays a
               permit authorizing parking in that area; and

       (c)     a person driving a vehicle that displays such a permit complies with all other
               parking restrictions that apply in that area;

       such a person may park that vehicle on any such street or part of a street.

23.1A Despite section 23.1, a person driving a vehicle that displays a disabled person’s parking
      placard authorized by the city may park that vehicle on a street or portion of a street
      referred to in section 23.1 for no more than three hours.

23.1B If:

       (a)     the City Engineer designates any street or part of a street for the reserved
               parking only of shared vehicles;

       (b)     the City Engineer identifies any such street or part of a street by posting on it
               signs indicating a prohibition on parking except for a shared vehicle marked as a
               shared vehicle and bearing the name of the shared vehicle organization that
               owns it; and

       (c)     a person driving a shared vehicle that displays such a permit complies with all
               other parking restrictions that apply in that area;

       such a person may park that shared vehicle on any such street or part of a street.

23.1C A person driving a shared vehicle that displays a permit issued under section 23.2 may
      park that shared vehicle on any such street or part of a street that is restricted to parking

       for residents of a particular area of the City but this By-law does not require those
       residents to purchase a permit to park there.

23.1D Despite section 23.1, a person driving a commercial vehicle who obtains a permit under
      section 21.6 or 21.6A and displays that permit in accordance with the section under
      which it was issued may park that vehicle in areas that are restricted to parking for
      residents of a particular area of the City for up to 3 hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
      and 6:00 p.m., at a rate of $3.00/hour.

23.2   The City Engineer may;

       (a)    issue any permit required under section 23;

       (b)    determine the form of permit; and

       (c)    impose conditions related to the area and period for which the permit is valid,
              how the permit shall be displayed and such other safety concerns as may be
              warranted.

23.3   No holder of a permit issued under section 23 authorizing parking in an area specified in
       the permit may cause or allow the permit to be:

       (a)    altered, copied, sold, assigned or otherwise transferred;

       (b)    placed on a vehicle other than the vehicle for which the permit was issued; or

       (c)    used or displayed in contravention of the conditions of the permit.

23.3A No person may:

       (a)    possess or display on a vehicle a copy of a permit issued under section 23;

       (b)    display a permit on a vehicle other than the vehicle for which it was issued; or

       (c)    display a permit on a vehicle after the person is no longer eligible to hold the
              permit.

23.3B No person may provide false information on an application for a permit issued under
      section 23.

23.3C Any person who provides false information on an application for a permit under section
      23 may not apply for another permit for a period of 6 months.

23.4   The annual fee for a permit authorizing parking under section 23.1(a)(i) or (ii) is:

       (a)    for parking of each vehicle belonging to an existing West End permit holder or to
       a long-term West End resident permit holder on streets located in the Denman West,
       West End Plateau or Davie-Beach areas, as defined in Schedule D to this By-law, up to
       a maximum of the number of vehicles for which permits were obtained at the time the
       permit holder became an existing West End permit holder or a long-term West End

       resident                                                           permit                                                holder
       .........................................................................................................$200.00;

       (b)         for parking of each vehicle belonging to a new permit holder on streets located in
       the Denman West, West End Plateau or Davie-Beach areas, as defined in Schedule D to
       this By-law
       .......................................................................................................$ $474.03;

       (c)         for parking of each vehicle belonging to a resident on streets located in the
       Robson            North         area,         as        defined          in       Schedule            D    to    this By-law
       ....................................................................................................... $200.00;

       (d)         for parking of each vehicle belonging to a resident on streets located in the area
       of the city bounded on the north by 6th Avenue, on the east by Cambie Street, on the
       south by 19th Avenue from Cambie Street to Oak Street, and by Douglas Crescent,
       Wolfe Avenue and Marpole Avenue from Oak Street to Granville Street, and on the west
       by Granville Street, except for the 500 and 600 blocks of West 18th Avenue and West
       19th Avenue
       ..........................................................................................................$150.00;

       (e)         for parking of each vehicle belonging to a resident on streets located in
       all                      other                         areas                         of                 the                city
       ..................................................................................................$100.00; and

       (f)         for parking of each vehicle belonging to a low income permit holder on streets
       located in the Denman West, West End Plateau or Davie-Beach areas, as defined in
       Schedule D to this By-law
       ....................................................................................................... $200.00

23.5   The annual fee for a permit authorizing parking issued under section 23.2 and additional
       parking privileges under Parking Meter By-law 2952 for each shared vehicle in all areas
       of the City is $110.00, except that for zero emission vehicles, the fee will be waived until
       December 31, 2030.

23.6   The annual fee for a permit authorizing reserved shared vehicle parking under section
       23.1B for each shared vehicle, payable to the city on May 1, is:

       (a)        Downtown area and Southeast
                  False Creek as described in the
                  Parking By-law for non-metered
                  reserved shared vehicle
                  parking space                                                                                       $1,772.87

       (b)        Metro Core, except the Downtown
                  Area and Southeast False Creek for
                  non-metered reserved shared vehicle
                  parking space                                                                                       $886.45

       (c)        Remainder of city outside Metro Core
                  for non-metered reserved shared vehicle
              parking space                                                       $402.93

       (d)    For reserved shared vehicle parking space that the city would otherwise meter,
              that sum which is equal to the maximum annual revenue the parking space
              would have generated if metered during the same calendar year in which the city
              issues the reserved shared vehicle parking permit, except that in the case of a
              reserved shared vehicle parking space that the city would otherwise meter to be
              used exclusively by zero emission vehicles, the annual fee will be held at the
              following amounts until December 31, 2030 for the first 50 spaces of this type
              designated prior to December 31, 2030:

              (i)       Downtown area and Southeast False Creek as described in the
                        Parking By-law                                                      $3000

              (ii)      Metro Core, being the area west of Clark Drive, north of 16th
                        Avenue, east of Burrard Street, and south of Burrard Inlet,         $1800
                        except the Downtown Area and Southeast False Creek

              (iii)     Remainder of city outside Metro Core                                $900

23.7   The annual fee for each vehicle set out in each of sections 23.4, 23.5, and 23.6 is
       exclusive of all sales, goods and services, harmonized, and other taxes imposed from
       time to time under federal or provincial law.

23.8   The City Engineer may issue:

       (a)    a one-week permit for a vehicle operated by a visitor to an area subject to
              residential parking permits, other than the West End and Robson North areas as
              defined in Schedule D to this By-law, for a fee of $16.50;

       (b)    a one-week permit for a vehicle operated by a visitor to the West End and
              Robson North areas as defined in Schedule D to this By-law, for a fee of $26.37;

       (c)    a daily permit for a vehicle operated by a tradesperson working in an area
              subject to residential parking permits, for a fee of $7.28.

23.9   A permit holder may return a permit issued under sections 23.4, 23.5, or 23.6 prior to the
       permit expiry date in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer, upon which the permit
       holder shall be given a pro-rated refund of the annual fee paid, calculated daily, less an
       administrative fee of $6.21.

24.1   Where an area is subject to two or more parking limitations the more restrictive
       regulation shall apply.

25. to 29. [Reserved]

                           TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY OF A STREET

30.   (1)   A person who wishes to have parking regulations temporarily suspended, or to
            reserve for temporary occupation any street, portion of a street, or air space
            above a street for any of the following purposes must apply to the City Engineer
            for permission to do so:

            (a)    in connection with, or incidental to, the construction, renovation, or
                   maintenance of any building adjacent to the street;

            (b)    in connection with, or incidental to, the delivery of any equipment, fixtures,
                   furniture or other items requiring the stopping of a vehicle at a specific
                   location;

            (c)    in connection with, or incidental to, the drilling or excavation of test holes;

            (d)    in connection with, or incidental to, the construction, installation or
                   maintenance of infrastructure; and

            (e)    for any other purpose which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is similar
                   to the foregoing.

      (2)   A person must not occupy any street, portion of a street, or air space above a
            street for any of the purposes set out in subsection 30(1) unless permission has
            been granted by the City Engineer, except that this prohibition does not apply to
            any occupancies by the City or to any occupancies that result in only momentary
            interruptions in public use of up to three minutes.

      (3)   The City Engineer may grant permission to occupy a street, portion of a street, or
            air space above a street in accordance with this section, subject to any
            conditions the City Engineer considers appropriate, including but not limited to
            conditions regarding:

            (a)    the number of days that the street may be occupied;

            (b)    the days of the week that the street may be occupied;

            (c)    the start and end times for each day that occupation of the street is
                   permitted;

            (d)    the placement of signs by the City to reserve the metered parking spaces
                   or area being occupied, including a requirement to pay to the City the
                   replacement cost of any signs lost or damaged during the period of
                   occupancy;

            (e)    the placement of traffic control signs or markers on a street;

            (f)    a traffic management plan or a traffic control plan;

            (g)    reports, plans, specifications, or reviews of any equipment to be used or
                   work being undertaken on the street as part of the proposed occupancy;

      (h)    proof of commercial general liability insurance, wrap-up liability insurance,
             or both, to the satisfaction of the Director of Risk Management, naming
             the City as an additional named insured;

      (i)    a release and indemnity of the City, to the satisfaction of the Director of
             Legal Services;

      (j)    a deposit with the City of a sum of money as security in a form
             satisfactory to the City in an amount adequate to guarantee the
             restoration of the street to its original condition or to repair any City
             property in case of damage and for any clean up needed as a
             consequence of the occupancy, including the cost of any inspections
             required to ensure such work is done to the satisfaction of the City
             Engineer; and

      (k)    imposing such other conditions as are necessary to prevent damage to
             the street, to ensure the safety of users of the street, or to respect the
             owners of adjacent property.

(4)   A person who wishes to obtain permission to occupy a street, portion of a street,
      or air space above a street in accordance with this section must submit the
      following:

      (a)    an application in the form prescribed by the City Engineer;

      (b)    any applicable fees as set out in Schedule I; and

      (c)    any additional documentation required by the City Engineer.

(5)   A permit issued under subsection (3):

      (a)    is not transferable;

      (b)    does not authorize the permit holder to require any person lawfully
             occupying any such location to discontinue their occupancy; and

      (c)    may be temporarily suspended by the City Engineer where its use may
             conflict with another use of the street.

(6)   The holder of a permit issued under this section must comply with all conditions
      of the permit, including the terms and conditions of a traffic management plan or
      a traffic control plan if one is required under the permit.

(7)   The City Engineer may cancel a permit issued under this section immediately,
      without prior notice, if the holder of the permit fails to comply with any of the
      conditions of the permit, including the terms and conditions of a traffic
      management plan or a traffic control plan if one is required under the permit.

                         THROUGH STREETS AND "STOP" SIGNS

31.    The City Engineer Shall Place "Stop" Signs.

       The City Engineer shall place or cause to be placed traffic signs displaying the word
       "Stop" at through streets.

32.    Stopping at "Stop" Signs.

       The driver of every vehicle shall stop such vehicle immediately before entering any
       intersection or traversing any level railway crossing where "stop" signs have been
       placed.

                                     ONE-WAY STREETS

33.    No driver shall operate a vehicle on a one-way street except in the direction indicated by
       a traffic sign.

34.    The driver of every vehicle being driven on a named street consisting of 2 roadways
       separated by a boulevard shall keep to the right of such boulevard.

                                            PLAZAS

34A.   (1)    Any street or part of a street identified by heavy black outline in Schedule “G” is a
              plaza.

       (2)    No person may cause, permit or allow a motor vehicle to enter or remain upon a
              plaza, unless otherwise authorized under this By-law.

       (3)    No person shall be in or remain in a plaza after 2:00 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m.,
              except for the purpose of traversing the plaza.

                          FUNERAL AND OTHER PROCESSIONS

35.    (1)    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
              other authorized procession while it is in motion. This provision shall not apply at
              intersections where traffic is being controlled by traffic-control signals or police
              officers.

       (2)    Funeral processions shall be identified as such by each vehicle therein having its
              headlights illuminated.

       (3)    The route taken by any funeral procession consisting of vehicles and persons on
              foot shall be subject to the written approval of the Chief Constable.

                        EMERGING FROM LANE OR PRIVATE ROAD

36.    The driver of a vehicle emerging from a lane, or from public or private premises shall
       stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or boulevard or into any
       lane.
                               TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS

37.   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at any intersection shall do so as follows, unless
      a different method of turning is directed by buttons, markers, or signs, in which event
      turns shall be made in accordance with the directions of such markers, buttons, or signs.

             Right Turns

             (a)     Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
                     as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.

             Left Turns

             (a)     The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a two-way street
                     shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
                     centre line thereof, and the turn shall be completed by the driver keeping
                     the vehicle to the right of the point of intersection of the centre line of the
                     street left with its crosswalk, and the point of intersection of the centre line
                     of the street entered with its crosswalk.

             (b)     The approach for a left from a one-way street shall into a two-way street
                     shall be made by proceeding on the left side of such one-way street as
                     close as practicable to the left curb, and when entering the two-way street
                     the driver shall keep the vehicle to the right of the point of intersection of
                     the centre line of such two-way street with its crosswalk.

             (c)     The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street
                     shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
                     centre line thereof and the turn shall be completed by the driver keeping
                     the vehicle to the right of the point of intersection of the centre line of such
                     two-way street with its crosswalk.

             (d)     The approach for a left turn from a one-way street into a one-way street
                     may be made from the left side of such street and the entry may be made
                     into the left side of the other one-way street, but the driver, in making the
                     turn, shall keep the vehicle as close as practicable to the left curbs of both
                     streets.

                      LIMITATIONS ON "U" OR REVERSE TURNING

38.   (1)    No driver of any vehicle shall turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite
             direction:

             (a)     On any through street.

             (b)     Within an intersection at any corner of which a "Stop" sign has been
                     placed, or where a traffic-control signal has been installed.

              (c)    At any other intersection unless such movement can be made in safety,
                     without backing, and without interfering with other traffic.

              (d)    On any street between intersecting streets.

              (e)    At any lane intersection.

       (2)    The provisions of this section shall not apply to the driver of any bus at a
              terminus of any route, or at any other location approved by the Council, but such
              driver in making any "U" turn shall first ascertain whether such movement can be
              made in safety.

                                 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING

39.    The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into an intersection or over a crosswalk
       and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle unless such movement can be
       made in safety.

39A.   No person shall, unless first approved by the City Engineer, drive a vehicle in reverse to
       enter or leave a roadway except where such action will not obstruct the orderly flow of
       traffic on the street.

                             CONTROL OF VEHICLE IN MOTION

40.    Every driver or other person in charge of any vehicle conveying goods, wares, or
       merchandise in or through any of the streets of the City shall remain upon such vehicle,
       or walk beside the horse or animal drawing the same, so as at all times to control the
       same while such vehicle is in motion.

                        OPERATION OF HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES

40A.   No person shall drive or otherwise operate a carriage or other vehicle drawn by a horse
       anywhere in the City outside of the area zoned RA-1 pursuant to the Zoning and
       Development By-law unless the person is licensed to operate a Horse-Drawn Carriage
       pursuant to the Vehicles for Hire By-law or has the written permission of the City
       Engineer.

                              OPERATION OF QUADRICYCLES

40B.   (1)    No person shall operate a quadricycle on City streets without first obtaining
              the approval of the City Engineer in writing for the route that the quadricycle will
              take.

       (2)    The City Engineer may temporarily or permanently modify an approved route at
              any time if, in the City Engineer’s opinion, it is advisable to do so.

       (3)    The City Engineer may charge a route review fee of $69.40 for their review of the
              route being proposed.

                    DRIVER MUST HAVE HAND ON STEERING DEVICE
41.   No person shall drive a vehicle without having at least one hand on the steering device,
      and no person shall operate a bicycle without having at least one hand on the handle
      bars.

                             TURN AT INTERSECTIONS ONLY

42.   No driver of a vehicle shall drive such vehicle from one side of a street to the other at
      any place other than at an intersection or street end, unless such driver shall have first
      ascertained that such movement can be made without obstructing traffic and can be
      made in safety having regard to the nature, condition, and use of the roadway, and the
      traffic which actually is at the time or might reasonably be expected to be on the
      highway.

                       DRIVING ON STREETS LINED FOR TRAFFIC

43.   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to mark distinguishing single or double lines on
      any street, which lines may or may not be in the middle of the travelled portion of the
      street.

      (1)    Double Lines. Where an unbroken double line is marked on the centre or any
             other portion of the street, no driver of a vehicle shall permit any portion of the
             vehicle to cross such line.

      (2)    Single Line. Upon any portion of a street marked with a distinguishing single line
             (whether broken or continuous) a driver of a vehicle while proceeding on such
             street shall keep the vehicle to the right of such single line so marked, except
             when turning or when passing an overtaken vehicle.

      (3)    Barrier Line. No driver of a vehicle shall permit any portion of the vehicle to cross
             a barrier line when proceeding in the direction of traffic on that side of the street
             contiguous to the continuous line.

      (4)    Traffic Lanes. Driving Within. Where a portion of a street is marked with traffic
             lanes, the driver of a vehicle shall, as nearly as possible, keep the vehicle entirely
             within a single lane and shall not move the vehicle from that lane until
             ascertaining that the movement can be made in safety. Where traffic signs have
             been placed allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction,
             every driver shall obey the direction of every such sign.

      (5)    Traffic Lanes. Passing on the Right. Whenever a roadway has been divided into
             2 or more marked lanes for traffic moving in the same direction, a driver while
             proceeding in any of such lanes, may overtake, and allowing sufficient clearance,
             pass on the right side of another vehicle proceeding in the same direction.

      (6)    Weaving. No driver shall drive a vehicle so that it weaves in and out of traffic in
             such a manner as to cause unreasonable interference with the movement of
             other vehicles.

44.    Where traffic signs are located, established or maintained on any street indicating that
       the rate of speed of all vehicles is regulated or fixed on any such street in any zone,
       place or area indicated by the location of such signs, no person shall drive such a
       vehicle at a greater rate of speed than that shown on the sign, provided however, that
       wherever such signs are displayed indicating that the zone, place or area is in the
       vicinity of a school, such restriction of speed shall be applicable all times of the day
       every day of the year; and whenever such signs are displayed indicating that the zone,
       place or area is in the vicinity of a playground, such restriction of speed shall be
       applicable all times of the day every day of the year. For the purpose of this section
       where signs are displayed indicating the zone, place or area is in the vicinity of a school
       and or playground, where times of day are prominently displayed on any sign with
       numerals, the maximum speed allowed in the zone shall be that number of kilometres
       per hour indicated by such numerals and applicable all times of the day every day of the
       year. For the purpose of this section where numerals alone, are prominently displayed
       on any sign, the maximum speed allowed in the zone shall be that number of kilometres
       per hour indicated by such numerals.

45.    No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon or along any lane at a rate of speed in
       excess of 20 kilometres per hour.

                            STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED

46.    No driver of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
       sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
       vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding
       any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.

                    SPEED LIMITS ON MINOR STREETS AND OTHER ROADS

47.    No person shall operate a vehicle on a minor street at a speed greater than 30
       kilometres per hour.

47A.   Despite any other provision of this By-law, no person shall operate a vehicle on any
       street or part of a street named in the table below at a speed greater than the speed
       indicated in Column A:

        Corridor                                                        Column A

        East 29th Avenue (Slocan Street to Atlin Street)                  30 km/h

        Yukon Street (West 5th Avenue. to West 12th Avenue)               30 km/h

        Keefer Street (Taylor Street to Carral Street)                    30 km/h

        Victoria Drive (Kitchener Street to Grant Street)                 30 km/h

        Victoria Dr (East 3rd Avenue to East 6th Avenue)                  30 km/h

        Victoria Dr (East 13th Avenue to East 19th Avenue)                30 km/h
Corridor                                                  Column A

Prior Street (Hawks Avenue to Raymur Avenue)              30 km/h

East Hastings Street and West Hastings Street (Abbott     30 km/h
Street to Jackson Street)

Beach Avenue (Park Lane to Burrard Street)                30 km/h

Southwest Marine Drive (West 70th Ave to Granville
Street)                                                   30 km/h

Anderson Street (Lamey's Mill Rd/West 2nd Avenue to
Granville Island)                                         30 km/h

Champlain Crescent (Matheson Crescent to East 54th
Avenue)                                                   30 km/h

East 16th Avenue (Midblock 200 East 16th Avenue to        30 km/h
Sophia Street - Tea Swamp Park)
Arbutus Street (West 7th Avenue to West 8th Avenue)       30 km/h

West Hastings (Broughton Street to Jervis Street)         30 km/h

Champlain Crescent (Three Cedars Drive to Langford        30 km/h
Avenue)

Blenheim Street (West 41st Avenue to West 43rd Avenue)    30 km/h

Victoria Drive (East 3rd Avenue to East 4th Avenue)       30 km/h

Elliot Street (East 46th Avenue to Waverley Avenue)       30 km/h

West 57th Avenue (Laurel Street to Heather Street)        30 km/h

East 54th Avenue (Doman Street to Tyne Street)            30 km/h

Argyle Street (East 60th Avenue to East 61st Avenue)      30 km/h

Elliot Street (East 51st Avenue to East 54th Avenue)      30 km/h

East 54th Avenue (Clarendon Street to Elliot Street)      30 km/h

Victoria Drive (Adanac Street to Venables Street)         30 km/h

400 Victoria Drive (East Hastings Street to East Pender   30 km/h
Street)

West 33rd Avenue (Oak Street to Willow Street)            30 km/h
Corridor                                                  Column A

East Boulevard (West 37th to West 41st Ave)               30 km/h

Grandview Hwy N (Mclean Drive to Woodland Drive)          30 km/h

Slocan Street (Ward Street to Euclid Street)              30 km/h

West 16th Avenue (Ontario Street to Columbia Street)      30 km/h

West King Edward Avenue (Crown Street to Wallace          30 km/h
Street)

Cornwall Street (Cypress Street to Trafalgar Street)      40 km/h

Commercial Drive (East 14th Avenue to East 15th Avenue)   40 km/h

Rupert Street (East 44th Avenue to East 45th Avenue)      40 km/h

West 49th Avenue (Ash Street to Tisdall Street)           40 km/h

Cornwall Avenue (Cypress Street to Trafalgar Street)      40 km/h

Expo Boulevard (Carrall Street to Abbott Street)          40 km/h

East 12th Avenue (Guelph Street to St. George Street)     40 km/h

Rupert Street (East 22nd Avenue to Anzio Drive)           40 km/h

East 22nd Avenue (Cassiar Street to Rupert Street)        40 km/h

Renfrew Street (East 17th Avenue to East 19th Avenue)     40 km/h

West 4th Avenue (Trimble Street to Wallace Street)        40 km/h

West King Edward Avenue (Granville Street to Marguerite   40 km/h
Street)

West King Edward Avenue (Collingwood Street to            40 km/h
Blenheim Street)

Rupert Street (Price Street to Wellington Street)         40 km/h

Great Northen Way (Brunswick Street to Carolina Street)   40 km/h

West 16th Avenue (Balaclava Street to Mackenzie Street)   40 km/h

Joyce Street (Crowley Street to Euclid Street)            40 km/h

       Corridor                                                       Column A

       West 16th Avenue (Wallace Street to Discovery Street)            40 km/h

       West King Edward Avenue (Oak Street to Laurel Street)            40 km/h

       Beatty Street (Robson Street to West Georgia Street)             40 km/h

       East 49th Avenue (Lanark Street to Knight Street)                40 km/h

       Victoria Drive (Newport Avenue to Brigadoon Avenue)              40 km/h

       Burrard Street (West Broadway to West 10th Avenue)               40 km/h

       Nelson Street (Burrard Street to Hornby Street)                  40 km/h

       Hornby Street (Smithe Street to Nelson Street)                   40 km/h

       Hornby Street (Pacific Street to Drake Street)                   40 km/h

       East 49th Avenue (Lancaster Street to Killarney Street)          40 km/h

       West 49th Avenue (Laburnum Street to Maple Street)               40 km/h

       Renfrew Street (Venables Street to Parker Street)                40 km/h

       West 12th Avenue (Trafalgar Street to Larch Street)              40 km/h

       N Renfrew Street (Oxford Street to Dundas Street)                40 km/h

       East 12th Avenue (Quebec Street to Main Street)                  40 km/h

       Main Street (East 32nd Avenue to East 33rd Avenue)               40 km/h

       East King Edward Avenue (St. George Street to Carolina           40 km/h
       Street)

       Denman Street (Haro Street to Barclay Street)                    40 km/h

       Fraser Street (East 39th Avenue to East 45th Avenue)             40 km/h

            VEHICLES FOR HIRE - STOPPING IN DESIGNATED STANDS ONLY

48.   (1)    No driver of a vehicle kept, used, or operated for hire, when such vehicle is not
             engaged and is waiting to be hired, shall stop such vehicle upon any street at any
             place other than a stand designated and allotted as and for the particular class of
             vehicle for hire indicated by traffic signs; provided, however, that nothing herein
             contained shall be deemed to prevent the driver of a taxi cab from stopping in
             any other place for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers or goods
            or from parking at any curb where there are no parking prohibitions or
            restrictions.

      (2)   Any such driver when arriving at any such stand not already fully occupied by the
            designated number of vehicles to be accommodated on such stand, shall stand
            such vehicle in the rear of the other vehicle or vehicles already occupying such
            stand.

      (3)   When a vehicle shall be called or driven off any such stand, the drivers of each of
            the other vehicles stationed on such stand in the rear of the vehicle so called or
            driven off shall cause their respective vehicles to be moved forward so that every
            vehicle shall in succession fill the place when shall be been previously occupied
            immediately in advance of such vehicle by the vehicle moved forward in
            accordance with the provisions of this by-law.

                    EMERGENCY AND PUBLIC UTILITY VEHICLES

49.   (1)   Exemption to Emergency Vehicles.

            The provisions of this by-law regulating the operation, movement, stopping and
            parking of vehicles shall not apply to any emergency vehicle while it is
            responding to an emergency call and sounding its siren, exhaust whistle or bell,
            or while attending any emergency call, but this exemption shall not excuse the
            driver of any such vehicle from exercising due and proper care for the safety of
            other traffic.

      (2)   Exemptions to Public Utility Vehicles.

            The provisions of this by-law prohibiting stopping or parking shall not apply to:

            (a)    Municipal or provincial utility vehicles;

            (b)    Vehicles of a public utility corporation;

            (c)    Wrecking vehicles;

            while such vehicles are actually engaged in works of necessity requiring them to
            be stopped or parked in contravention of any of such provisions.

            This exemption shall not relieve the drivers of such vehicles from taking due
            precaution to indicate the presence of such vehicle on the street while so parked
            or stopped.

      (3)   Exemption to Other Vehicles.

            The Council may by resolution exempt any class of vehicles from such provisions
            of this by-law relating to parking and stopping as the Council may deem fit and
            under such conditions as the Council may impose, and may provide for the
            identification of such vehicles so exempted.

             No person shall display on any vehicle any identification card or sticker
             purporting to provide for such exemption unless such card or sticker has been
             duly authorized and bears the signature of the Chief Constable or the City
             Engineer.

50.   Duty of Drivers on Approach of Ambulances and Other Emergency Vehicles.

      Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle when the driver thereof or any other
      person therein or thereon is giving audible signals by siren, exhaust whistle or bell or on
      the sounding of any siren or bell placed on any street for the purpose of giving warning
      of the approach of any emergency vehicle the driver of every other vehicle, unless
      otherwise directed by a police officer, shall immediately drive to a position parallel and as
      close as possible to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, clear of any intersection,
      and shall stop and remain in such position until such emergency vehicle has passed.

51.   Emergency Vehicles to Sound Siren.

      The driver of every emergency vehicle while responding to an emergency call shall
      sound or cause to be sounded continuously a siren, horn, exhaust whistle, or bell
      attached to such vehicle.

                       WARNING BELLS OR SIGNALS ON BRIDGES

52.   Every person operating any vehicle or driving any animal along any bridge where
      warning bells, signals, gates, or barriers are installed shall immediately on the ringing of
      such bells or the operating of such signals, come to a full stop clear of any such gates or
      barriers, and shall remain stationary until such gates or barriers shall have been
      removed and traffic shall have been permitted to again proceed.

                            REGULATING SIRENS AND HORNS

53.   Other Sirens Prohibited.

      Except as provided in section 51 no person shall use any siren, horn or exhaust whistle,
      on any vehicle in any street.
54.   Horn for Warning Only.

      No person shall sound the horn of a vehicle except when necessary to warn a person or
      animal of danger.

55.   [Deleted]

                       FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED

56.   No driver of any vehicle other than a vehicle of the Fire or Police Department or an
      ambulance shall follow closer than a city block any fire apparatus travelling in response
      to a fire alarm, or to drive into or stop any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus
      has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.

                                    CROSSING FIRE HOSE

57.    No driver of a vehicle shall drive such vehicle on, over, or across any fire hose laid on
       any street or private road, unless directed so to do by the person in charge of such hose
       or a police officer.

                               TRAFFIC IN VICINITY OF A FIRE

58.    Any officer or member of the Fire Department may, while in the course of duty in or
       about any fire, or in order to expedite traffic and safeguard pedestrians, direct traffic on
       any street in the vicinity of any fire. No person shall fail to comply with the direction of
       any such officer or member of such Fire Department.

                                  SLOW MOVING VEHICLES

59.    The driver of every slow moving vehicle shall drive such vehicle as close as possible to
       the right hand edge or curb of any street unless it is impracticable to travel on such side.
       For the purposes of this section, bicycles, pedicabs, and quadricycles shall be regarded
       at all times as slow moving vehicles.

59A.   A person may drive or operate a neighbourhood zero emission vehicle only:

       (a)    on a street that has a speed limit of 50 kilometres per hour or less; and

       (b)    in the lane on the street that is closest to the right hand edge or curb of the
              street, except when a left hand turn is necessary or when passing another
              vehicle.

                                           BICYCLES

60.    No person shall ride any bicycle upon any sidewalk except where posted by signs.

60A.   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a street while wearing headphones, or any other
       manufactured device capable of transmitting sound, over or in close proximity to both
       ears, except that this prohibition shall not apply to the wearing of a device designed and
       worn for the purpose of improving the wearer's ability to hear sounds emanating from
       outside of the device.

60B.   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a street unless the bicycle is equipped with a bell
       capable of being used as a warning.

60C.   The various paths and ways shown and described by either a thick black solid line or a
       thick black dashed line on the plans attached to this By-law as Schedule C are, pursuant
       to Section 124(1) of the Motor Vehicle Act, hereby designated for the purposes of
       sections 60D and 60E.

60D.   No person shall operate or ride as a passenger on a bicycle on any path or way shown
       on Schedule C unless the person is properly wearing a bicycle safety helmet that has
       been designated under or complies with the standards and specifications of the Motor
       Vehicle Act.

60E.   No parent or guardian of a person under the age of 16 years shall authorize or knowingly
       permit the person to operate or ride as a passenger on a bicycle on any path or way
       shown on Schedule C unless the person is properly wearing a bicycle safety helmet that
       has been designated under or complies with the standards and specifications of the
       Motor Vehicle Act.

60F.   A police officer may arrest without warrant any bicyclist whom the officer finds
       committing a breach of any provision of this by-law if such person fails to stop and state
       his or her proper name and address when so requested by the police officer.

60G.   No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, electric kick scooter or push scooter, or use
       non-motorized skates in a marked crosswalk, unless it is also marked by elephants’ feet
       markings on one or both sides of the crosswalk, or it is otherwise signed to permit
       cycling.

60H.   Subject to the provisions of section 60I, a person may ride a bicycle, skateboard,
       electric kick scooter or push scooter, or use non-motorized skates in an unmarked
       crosswalk.

60I.   A person riding a bicycle, skateboard, electric kick scooter or push scooter, or using
       non-motorized skates in, through or out of a marked or unmarked crosswalk, must yield
       the right of way to pedestrians who are entering into, walking in or walking out of the
       crosswalk. For the purposes of this section, a marked crosswalk includes the area of the
       crosswalk delineated by elephants’ feet markings.

                            PASSENGERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES

61.    No person shall drive a motor vehicle with more than 3 persons in the front seat,
       including the driver.

62.    No driver of a vehicle primarily intended for carrying passengers shall extend any part of
       his or her body, or permit any part of a passenger's body, to extend outside the vehicle,
       except that the driver may extend a hand to indicate an intention to turn, slow down,
       stop, or pull out from a curb.

63.    No person while riding in or on any vehicle shall do any act which will interfere with the
       driver's proper control of such vehicle.

             ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS RESPECTING PUBLIC PARKS

63A.   No person shall:

       (1)     Ride or drive any horse or other animal or drive or propel any vehicle in any
               public park except on the bridle paths or roadways provided therein for such
               purpose; provided however, that wheel chairs and children's carriages may be
               used on sidewalks where such use will not obstruct the free passage of
             pedestrians.

      (2)    Ride or drive a horse or other animal, or drive any vehicle in any public park
             without reasonable consideration of other persons using the public park.

      (3)    Drive any vehicle in any public park in such a manner as would disturb the
             enjoyment thereof by others, or might cause injury or damage to other persons,
             animals or property.

      (4)    Drive any vehicle in any public park (except as provided in section 44) at a
             greater speed than 40 kilometres per hour or such lesser speed as may be
             directed by traffic signs.

      (5)    Ride or drive any horse or other animal on any roadway in any public park where
             the direction of traffic is restricted, except in the direction indicated by traffic
             signs.

      (6)    Drive any vehicle having a gross weight with load of more than 15 tonnes in any
             public park or deposit or remove any material in or from any public park without
             the written permission of the Park Board or its General Manager.

      (7)    Operate any vehicle for hire within any public park which takes on or discharges
             passengers without the written consent of the Park Board.

      (8)    Park any vehicle on any roadway in any public park for a longer period that 15
             minutes after 6:00 p.m. during the months of November, December and January;
             after the hour of 8:00 p.m. during the months of February, March, April and
             October and after the hour of 10:00 p.m. during the months of May, June, July,
             August and September.

      (9)    Drive over, stop or park any vehicle on any flower bed, or on any grass area in
             any public park except when directed by a Park Board attendant.

      (10)   Park or stop a vehicle on either a street or any other area within a park that is
             indicated by signs as reserved for or restricted to service vehicles only unless
             such vehicle is a service vehicle as defined by this by-law.

                                     TRAFFIC NOTICES

64.   No person other than the owner or operator of a vehicle, an employee or contractor of
      the City of Vancouver providing towing or parking related services, or a police officer
      shall remove any notice placed on a vehicle or affixed thereto by an employee of the City
      of Vancouver or a police officer in the course of their duties in checking violations of this
      by-law.

65.   Once any notice has been placed on or affixed to a vehicle by an employee of the City of
      Vancouver or by a police officer in the course of their duties in checking violations of this
      by-law, it shall be unlawful for any person to alter such notice in such a manner that it
      may be used or acted upon by any person as if it were genuine.
                              EMERGENCY SNOW CLEARING

65A   (1)     Where the City Engineer is of the opinion that snow conditions require special
              clearing operations, the City Engineer may declare a period during which certain
              sections of this by-law will, to facilitate emergency clearing operations, be
              temporarily superseded by the provisions of subsection (2) provided that:

              (a)    the declaration includes the commencement and termination time and
                     date for the period of emergency clearing; and

              (b)    notification of the period is given by way of public advertisement.

      (2)     During the time set by the City Engineer pursuant to subsection (1) the following
              provisions shall apply and shall, in the case of a conflict with any other section of
              this by-law, prevail:

              (a)    No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked on a
                     transit route or a one-way street in the Downtown.

              (b)    No person shall stop or park a vehicle or allow the same to remain
                     stopped or parked on any portion of any street where signs are placed by
                     direction of the City Engineer indicating that snow clearing operations are
                     in progress.

                                            PART II

                           REGULATING THE USE OF STREETS

            MERCHANDISE NOT TO BE DISPLAYED ON STREET OR SIDEWALK

66.   (1)     No person shall place or cause or suffer to be placed by any person in the
              employ of or under the control of such person, any merchandise, vehicle, chattel,
              or wares of any nature on any street, sidewalk or boulevard for the purpose of
              sale or display, or for any other purpose whatsoever except in the actual course
              of receipt or delivery, or to use any portion of any sidewalk for the purpose of
              selling any packaging goods, wares, or merchandise of any nature or for
              measuring, packing, or unpackaging goods, wares or merchandise. PROVIDED,
              HOWEVER, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person duly
              authorized to conduct street vending pursuant to the Street Vending By-law.

      (2)     For the purposes of this section "merchandise" shall include food products,
              produce and like products.

      (3)     Any merchandise that is displayed, sold or offered for sale on any street in
              contravention of subsection (1) may be impounded pursuant to the Impounding
              By-law, except that perishable merchandise may be disposed of upon removal.

                               PROHIBITION OF OBSTRUCTIONS

66A.   (1)   A person must not abandon, place, leave, or keep any item or object on a street
             that obstructs, impedes, or interferes with the passage of vehicles or
             pedestrians unless authorized or permitted to do so under the       provisions of
             this by-law or another City by-law.

       (2)   For the purposes of section 66A(1), an item or object is deemed to be
             abandoned if it is left unattended on a street.

                      USE OF A STREET (INCLUDING SIDEWALK)
                          FOR SPORT OR ENTERTAINMENT

67.    (1)   Except with the written permission of the Council, no person shall

             (a)    engage in any sport, amusement, exercise or occupation on a street that
                    obstructs, impedes, or interferes with the passage of vehicles or
                    pedestrians, or

             (b)    cause any obstruction in or upon a street.

       (2)   Despite subsection (1), no person shall perform or otherwise provide
             entertainment in or upon a street unless that person is the holder of a Street
             Entertainment Permit issued by the City Engineer pursuant to this By-law.

       (3)   Despite subsection (2) no permit is required to perform or otherwise provide
             entertainment in those areas identified in Schedule E which is attached to and
             forms part of this By-law.

67A.   (1)   Where an applicant has completed an application form to the City Engineer's
             satisfaction and has paid the fee set out in this section, the City Engineer may
             issue a Street Entertainment Permit to such person to permit them to perform or
             provide entertainment upon a street in compliance with the conditions which form
             part of the permit.

       (2)   A permit issued under subsection (1) may contain conditions

             (a)    limiting the areas where the performance or entertainment may occur,

             (b)    limiting the duration and time when the performance or entertainment
                    may occur,

             (c)    requiring that satisfactory public liability insurance be held by the
                    applicant,

             (d)    prohibiting the use of amplification or other equipment which electronically
                    enhances the volume of sound where it requires an external power
                     source or unless the applicant has attended an information session
                     authorized by the City Engineer,

              (e)    imposing such other rules as are necessary to provide respect for the
                     owners of adjacent property and other users of the street.

       (3)    A permit issued under subsection (1) is not transferable and may be temporarily
              suspended by the City Engineer where its use may conflict with another use of
              the street.

       (4)    No person shall fail to comply with a term or condition of a permit issued
              pursuant to this section.

       (5)    Failure to comply with any condition set out in a permit shall render the permit
              subject to immediate cancellation by the City Engineer without prior notice.

       (6)    For a Street Entertainment Permit the applicant must pay to the city, exclusive of
              a goods and services tax imposed under the Excise Tax Act (Canada):

              (a)    $159.03 for a permit for one year, or

              (b)    $53.59 for a permit for a period of four months.

                           WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLES

68.    No person shall stand or park any vehicle on any street for the purpose of washing,
       greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

68A.   No person shall:

       (a)    wash or grease any vehicle on any street; or

       (b)    repair any vehicle on any street, except for repairs necessitated by an
              emergency.

                     CROWDS OR GROUPS OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC

69.    (1)    No person shall form part of a group of persons congregated on a street in such
              a manner as to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles, except with
              the written permission of the Council.

       (2)    No person shall do anything which will attract the attention of persons and cause
              them to congregate in a group upon any street in such manner as to obstruct the
              free passage of pedestrians or vehicles, or in such manner that the persons so
              congregated might themselves be in danger of injury from traffic, except with the
              written permission of the Council.

       (3)    Subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to religious street meetings
              permissions for which has been given in writing by the City Engineer.

                                           FIGHTING

69A.   A person must not fight or engage in any other similar physical confrontation with one or
       more other persons in, on, or near a street or other public place.

                                          LOITERING

70.    No person shall stand or loiter on any street in such a manner as to obstruct or impede
       or interfere with traffic thereon.

                               OBSTRUCTIVE SOLICITATION

70A.   (1)    For the purpose of this section 70A,

              "cause an obstruction" means

              (a)    to sit or lie on a street in a manner which obstructs or impedes the
                     convenient passage of any pedestrian traffic in a street, in the course of
                     solicitation,

              (b)    to continue to solicit from or otherwise harass a pedestrian after that
                     person has made a negative initial response to the solicitation or has
                     otherwise indicated a refusal,

              (c)    to physically approach and solicit from a pedestrian as a member of a
                     group of three or more persons,

              (d)    to solicit on a street within 10 m of

                     (i)     an entrance to a bank, credit union or trust company, or

                     (ii)    an automated teller machine, or

              (e)    to solicit from an occupant of a motor vehicle in a manner which obstructs
                     or impedes the convenient passage of any vehicular traffic in a street;

              "solicit" means to, without consideration, ask for money, donations, goods or
              other things of value whether by spoken, written or printed word or bodily
              gesture, for one's self or for any other person, and solicitation has a
              corresponding meaning, but does not include soliciting for charity by the holder of
              a license for soliciting for charity under the provisions of the License By-law;

              "trust company" means an office or branch of a trust company to which the Trust
              and Loans Company Act (Canada) applies and in which deposit accounts are
              held.

       (2)    No person shall solicit in a manner which causes an obstruction.

                                STRUCTURES ON STREETS

71A.         A person must not build, construct, place, maintain, occupy, or cause to be built,
             constructed, placed, maintained or occupied in any street, any structure, object,
             or substance which is an obstruction to the free use of such street, or which may
             encroach thereon, without having first obtained a permit issued by the City
             Engineer, in accordance with this By-law, except that this section does not apply
             to a person:

       (a)   installing signs authorized by the City Engineer on or over City streets, and
             intended to control traffic or parking, or to provide directions or street
             identification;

       (b)   putting up or installing street decorations authorized by the City Engineer;

       (c)   putting up or installing any other temporary sign or structure which is authorized
             by by-law, or by provincial or federal legislation;

       (d)   installing advertising devices which are integral with public conveniences, as
             covered by special agreements with the City, such as bus shelter advertising,
             map stand advertising or automated public toilet advertising; or

       (e)   placing a sign or notice on a free standing kiosk or other structure on a street,
             which is provided by and in a location designated by the City Engineer,
             specifically for free public use for the purpose of political expression.

                   STRUCTURES CONVEYING POLITICAL EXPRESSION

71B.   (1)   A person seeking a permit under section 71A for any structure, object or
             substance which conveys political expression, must apply for the permit in the
             form prescribed by the City Engineer.

       (2)   The applicant for a permit under section 71A must submit with the application
             drawings indicating the construction methods, materials and dimensions of any
             proposed structure for which a permit has not been previously issued.

       (3)   The City Engineer must grant a permit under section 71A, except that the City
             Engineer must not grant a permit if the structure, object or substance:

             (a)     obstructs or interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

             (b)     obstructs or interferes with any utility , postal or similar installation;

             (c)     obstructs or interferes with any other structure, object, substance or
                     construction works which occupy the street pursuant to a permit;
      (d)   obstructs or interferes with the use of street furniture;

      (e)   obstructs or interferes with City works, on or adjacent to the street;

      (f)   has a width greater than 25% of the width of an adjacent business
            frontage;

      (g)   is located on street frontage abutting a site which:

            (i)     contains only dwelling uses,

            (ii)    in the case of mixed uses, contains ground floor dwelling uses, or

            (iii)   is located in a zoning district listed in Schedule F, except that
                    subsection (g)does not apply to any Consulate which is listed with
                    the Government of Canada as a Consular Office;

      (h)   is within 5 meters of a building entrance or exit;

      (i)   is within 5 meters of a bus stop, street intersection, driveway crossing,
            loading zone, taxi zone, or wheelchair ramp;

      (j)   is within 0.5 meters of a curb;

      (k)   is attached or affixed to cement, asphalt or other hard surface on the
            street;

      (l)   measures more than 1.6 meters in height at the highest point;

      (m)   measures more than 1.6 meters in width at the widest point;

      (n)   measures more than 1.0 meter in depth at the deepest point;

      (o)   has a base area larger than 1.6 square meters;

      (p)   contains moving parts, electrical or electronic components or lights;

      (q)   is structurally unsafe or unstable; or

      (r)   was at the same location or in the same city block applied for, within the
            previous sixty days.

(4)   The holder of a permit granted under section 71A, or their authorized
      representative, must:

      (a)   attend at the structure, object, or substance for a minimum of six non-
            consecutive hours between the hours of 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. daily;

      (b)   remove the structure, object or substance from the street between the
                    hours of 8 p.m. and 8 a.m. daily; and

             (c)    keep the structure , object, or substance safe and in good repair at all
                    times.

       (5)   The holder of a permit granted under section 71A must not use or permit the use
             of:

             (a)    electronic signs;

             (b)    electric or gas lighting or appliances;

             (c)    extension cords; or

             (d)    open flames, propane tanks, gas or electric heaters, or barbeques

             at or near the structure, object or substance authorized by the permit.

       (6)   The holder of a permit granted under section 71A must not use or promote the
             use of expression which:

             (a)    is obscene;

             (b)    promotes hatred or violence;

             (c)    is defamatory; or

             (d)    contains commercial content.

                                          TERM OF PERMIT

71C.         A permit granted under section 71A is valid for thirty days from the date of
             issuance, except that the City Engineer must not issue:

             (a)    a permit for a term greater than thirty days;

             (b)    more than six non-consecutive permits per year, for any city block or

                    location;

             (c)    more than one permit every sixty days, for any city block or location; or

             (d)    a permit to an applicant who is the current holder of such a permit.

                    EXPIRY OR CANCELLATION OF PERMIT

71D.         The City Engineer must cancel a permit issued under section 71A, if the holder of
             the permit fails to comply with any of the provisions in section 71B.
               TABLES CONVEYING POLITICAL EXPRESSION

71E.   Despite section 71A of the By-law, a table which conveys political expression
       does not require a permit under section 71B of this By-law if:

       (a) it is no larger than 1 meter in depth by 1.8 meters in width by .75 meters in
           height;

       (b) it is placed on the street for no more than thirty consecutive days;

       (c) it is removed from the street between the hours of 8 p.m. and 8 a.m. daily;

       (d) it is attended at all times;

       (e) no more than one table is placed on any city block at any time;

       (f) the name of the sponsoring organization or person is clearly displayed on the

           table;

       (g) it does not obstruct or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

       (h) it does not obstruct or interfere with any utility, postal or similar installation;

       (i) it does not obstruct or interfere with any other structure, object, substance or

           construction works which occupy the street pursuant to a permit;

       (j) it does not obstruct or interfere with the use of street furniture;

       (k) it does not obstruct or interfere with City works, on or adjacent to the street;

       (l) it is more than 5 meters from any building entrance or exit;

       (m) it is more than 5 meters from any bus stop, street intersection, driveway

           crossing, loading zone, taxi zone, or wheelchair ramp;

       (n) it is more than 0.5 meters from any curb;

       (o) it contains no moving parts, electrical or electronic components or lights;

       (p) it is structurally safe and stable;

       (q) it is not used in association with any electronic signs, electric or gas lighting

          or appliances, extension cords, open flames, propane tanks, gas or electric

          heaters, barbeques; and

       (r) it does not contain obscene or defamatory content and does not promote

          hatred or violence.

                                 EMERGENCIES ON STREETS

71F.   In the case of an emergency, the City Engineer may temporarily remove a
       structure or table that is permitted on a street.

               CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS ON STREETS

71G.   A person must not lay, construct, or reconstruct any sidewalk on any street,
       without having first:

       (a) obtained a permit issued by the City Engineer, which may include conditions
           such as a requirement to repair any damage to public property that occurs as
           a result of the work, including damage to curbs and pavement, to the
           satisfaction of the City Engineer; and

       (b) paid to the City the following permit fee, exclusive of a goods and services tax
           imposed under the Excise Tax Act (Canada), in accordance with the fee
           schedule set out in section 71G (2):

          For a sidewalk of up to and including 20 square metres………$140.97

          For each additional square metre or part thereof………………..$12.80

          To a maximum fee of……………………………………………..$989.71

                              DEBRIS ON STREETS

71H.   The owner or occupier of real property adjacent to a street, must not allow or
       permit any earth, rock, stones, trees, logs, stumps or similar substances or things
       from the property:

       (a) to cave, fall, crumble, slide, accumulate or be otherwise deposited on to a
           street; or

       (b) to remain on a street.

                              WATER ON STREETS

71I.   The owner or occupier of real property adjacent to a street, must not allow or
       permit water to flow from the property on to a street.
                                                CONTAINERS

71J.
       (1)   A person who has been granted permission to place a container upon a street,
             portion of a street, or air space above a street under section 30 of this by-law
             must, in addition to complying with all conditions of the permit:

             (a)    mark and maintain the container with two inch (five centimeter) wide DOT
                    Type C2 red and white reflective tape, or equivalent tape satisfactory to
                    the City Engineer, by taping:

                    (i)         vertically at least one metre of each end corner,

                    (ii)        at least 50% of the length of each side, equally spaced as close
                                as practicable to 75 cm above the ground, and

                    (iii)       a solid stripe horizontally across each end as close as practicable
                                to 75 cm above the ground,

                    and as follows:
                                             SIDE VIEW
                                               COMPANY NAME
                                                TELEPHONE #

                                                2'-6" (75cm)

                                  2" (5cm) HORIZONTAL STRIPS
                                      APPLY EVENLY SPACED LENGTH
                                       STRIPS ON EACH SIDE OF BIN

                                            END VIEW

                                                               3 '-3 " (1 .0 m )

                                                2'-6" (75cm)

                            2" (5cm) HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL STRIPS
                               APPLY 3'-3" (1.0m) HIGH EVENLY SPACED STRIPS
                                  AND FULL WIDTH ON EACH END OF BIN

             (b)    as an alternative to subsection (1)(a), place, secure, and maintain at least
                    four Ministry of Transportation approved traffic delineators or cones and
                    one Ministry of Transportation approved Type A reflective barricade, or
                    equivalent devices satisfactory to the City Engineer, in positions that
                    make the container visible to any approaching driver or cyclist;

           (c)    place and maintain the container on the street so that it:

                  (i)     is at least 10 metres from the nearest edge of the closest sidewalk
                          on an intersecting street,

                  (ii)    is at least 12 metres from the nearest edge of pavement on an
                          existing street where no sidewalk exists,

                  (iii)   is at least 12 metres from any crosswalk,

                  (iv)    is at least six metres from any lane or driveway,

                  (v)     is not less than 30 cm from any curb or edge of the roadway when
                          placed on a street,

                  (vi)    allows a minimum three metres of street or lane that is usable for
                          travel;

           (d)    place and maintain a flashing barricade in the street in front of the
                  container where the container projects into the traveled portion of a street;

           (e)    mark and maintain on the container in at least three inch lettering on at
                  least two sides of the container the name and telephone number of the
                  owner of the container; and

           (f)    not place a container on a street so that the container obstructs or
                  impedes a marked travel lane on the street unless that lane is closed with
                  delineators, arrow board, and advance warning signage consistent with
                  the Ministry of Transportation Traffic Control Manual for Work on
                  roadways.

                                     ELECTRONIC SIGNS

71K. (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this or any other By-law, the City
           Engineer may issue a permit for a person to construct, maintain and
           operate an electronic sign on a street.

     (2)   The City Engineer may impose conditions on a permit for an electronic       sign on
           street regarding:

           (a)    traffic and safety matters;

           (b)    hours and levels of illumination;

           (c)    construction requirements;

           (d)    timing of construction;

           (e)    timing of and requirements for reviews and inspections;

            (f)    the term of the permit;

            (g)    responsibilities of the permit holder;

            (h)    the size, appearance, location, design and form of the sign;

            (i)    operational matters including how long the static image must remain
                   static and how quickly an image must transition to the next image;

            (j)    proof of commercial general liability insurance, wrap-up liability insurance,
                   or other insurance, to the satisfaction of the Director of Risk Management,
                   naming the City as an additional named insured; and

            (k)    compliance with this by-law or other enactments.

      (3)   Every person applying for a permit for an electronic sign must apply in writing to
            the City Engineer.

      (4)   No person may apply for or hold a permit for an electronic sign unless they have
            entered into a valid agreement with the City authorizing the placement of an
            electronic sign on the proposed site.

      (5)   Any agreement with the City must stipulate the term of the agreement, the rent,
            indemnities in favour of the City and may include such other terms as are
            considered necessary and be executed by the City Engineer on behalf of
            Council.

      (6)   The City Engineer may revoke a permit for an electronic sign if the permit holder
            breaches any condition of the permit or if the agreement is terminated or expires.

      (7)   In this section 71K:

            “Electronic Sign” means a third-party electronic advertising sign:

            (a)    that displays an electronic static image where the image remains static on
                   the screen for a stipulated period of time and the transition between
                   images occurs within a stipulated period of time;

            (b)    that is self-supporting and is attached to the ground; and

            (c)    that complies with the terms of the permit issued for the sign.

            “Street” does not include the roadway.

                    IMPEDING TRAFFIC ON STREET PROHIBITED

72.   (1)   No person shall cut, saw, break, split, place or pile firewood, lumber, blocks, rock,
            stone, debris or other material, or mix mortar, or do any other act upon any street
            which will obstruct or impede traffic thereon or deface or injure such street.

       (2)   No owner or occupier of any premises or any other person purchasing or
             delivering firewood, lumber, blocks, rock, stone or other material shall permit
             such firewood, lumber, blocks, stone or material to remain or to be placed on any
             street in such a manner as to obstruct or impede traffic thereon.

       (3)   No owner or occupier of any premises shall permit any firewood or other fuel
             purchased by or delivered at the request of such person to remain on any City
             street except while moving the same into the premises adjoining such street and
             in no event for a longer period than 72 hours.

       (4)   The City Engineer or Chief Constable may remove or cause to be removed any
             such firewood, lumber, blocks, rock, stone or other materials so deposited and
             the cost of such removal shall be charged to the owner or person making delivery
             thereof and the Director of Legal Services is hereby authorized to institute
             proceedings in any Court of competent jurisdiction to recover such cost.

72A.   (1)   An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause,
             permit or allow that vehicle to be left or abandoned on a street.

       (2)   A vehicle on a street which is:

             (i)     unlicensed;

             (ii)    uninsured;

             (iii)   not displaying current and valid number plates as required by the Motor
                     Vehicle Act;

             (iv)    in a derelict condition;

             (v)     inoperable; or

             (vi)    parked continuously for more than 14 days;

                     is deemed to be left or abandoned on a street in contravention of this By-
                     law.

       (3)   A vehicle is deemed to be unlawfully left on a street in contravention of this
             By-law if:

             (i)     the vehicle has an automobile security system that is operating in
                      contravention of the Motor Vehicle Noise and Emission Abatement
                      By-law; or

             (ii)    the vehicle horn sounds audibly for a period of more than 10 minutes.

73.    (1)   No person shall erect any doorstep, porch, railing, or projection into or
             obstruction in any street, without permission from the City Engineer.

       (2)   The City Engineer or Chief Constable may remove or cause to be removed any
              unauthorized doorstep, porch, railing, or projection into or obstruction in any
              street. The cost of such removal shall be charged to the owner thereof and the
              Director of Legal Services is hereby authorized to institute proceedings in any
              Court of competent jurisdiction to recover such cost.

                          TETHERING ANIMALS IN PUBLIC PLACES

74.    No person shall leave any horse or other animal attached to any vehicle in any street
       without being tethered in such manner as to prevent such horse or other animal from
       running away or from moving on the street in any way so as to obstruct or impede other
       traffic thereon.

75.    No person shall tie or fasten any horse or other animal to any tree, traffic sign or lamp
       standard.

                       REMOVAL OF SNOW OR ICE FROM SIDEWALK

76.    The owner or occupier of any parcel of real property shall, not later than 10:00 a.m.
       every day, remove all snow and ice from any sidewalk adjacent to such parcel for a
       distance that coincides with the parcel's property line and for the full width of the
       sidewalk.

76A.   If an owner or occupier of any parcel of real property fails to remove snow and ice, as
       required by section 76, the City Engineer may authorize the removal by another person
       and the costs of such removal shall be at the expense of the owner or occupier as the
       case may be, and the city may recover such expense by action in a court of competent
       jurisdiction.

76B.   Notwithstanding the requirement set out in section 76, no owner or occupier of any
       parcel of real property shall cause, permit or allow any snow or ice to remain on a
       sidewalk adjacent to such parcel for a period of more than 24 hours.

                       RIDING, COASTING AND SLIDING ON STREETS

77.    Except as permitted by section 77A, no person shall coast or slide on a sled, skis,
       skates, skateboard or other apparatus on any street, lane, or other public place;
       provided, however that Council may declare any street, lane or other public place closed
       to all other traffic for the purpose of permitting coasting or sliding on a sled, skis, skates,
       skateboard or other apparatus thereon; and the Chief Constable may make such
       provision for prohibiting such other traffic and with the assistance of the City Engineer
       may make such provision for protecting such persons using such streets, lanes, or public
       places as aforesaid for the purpose of enabling such coasting and sledding to be carried
       on with safety.

77A.   (1)    Despite section 77, but subject to the requirements of this section, a person may
              ride or coast on non-motorized skates, a skateboard or a push scooter on any
              minor street or protected bicycle lane.

       (2)    A person riding or coasting on non-motorized skates, skateboard, or push-
              scooter must, at the request of a police officer, state his or her correct name,
              address, and date of birth.

       (3)    A person must not ride or coast on non-motorized skates, a skateboard, or push
              scooter on any minor street or protected bicycle lane:

              (a)    while wearing headphones, or any other manufactured device capable of
                     transmitting sound, over or in close proximity to both ears, except that this
                     prohibition will not apply to the wearing of a device designed and worn for
                     the purpose of improving the wearer’s ability to hear sounds emanating
                     from outside of the device;

              (b)    unless that person wears a helmet;

              (c)    unless, between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise, that
                     person or the person’s skateboard or push scooter is equipped with and
                     using lighting or reflective equipment that under normal atmospheric
                     conditions is visible in all directions at least 75 m from the person or the
                     skateboard or push scooter;

              (d)    unless that person travels in the direction of vehicular or bicycle traffic
                     and as close as practicable to the extreme right side of minor street or
                     protected bicycle lane; or

              (e)    in a reckless manner or in a manner that will obstruct traffic or endanger
                     the safety or property of any person.

       (4)    A police officer may arrest without warrant any person riding or coasting on
              skates, skateboard, or push-scooter whom the officer finds committing a breach
              of any provision of this By-law if such person fails to stop and state his or her
              correct name, address, and date of birth.

77B.   A person may ride an electric kick scooter on any protected bicycle lane or any street
       that is subject to a speed limit of 50 kilometers per hour or less.

                     INJURY TO TREES AND FLOWERS PROHIBITED

78.    No person, other than a duly authorized officer or employee of the City or the Park Board
       acting in pursuance of his or her duties, shall dig up or in any manner injure or destroy
       any tree, flower, foliage, flowering plant, foliage plant, or shrubbery in any street.

                            DRIVING OVER CURBS PROHIBITED

79.    No person shall ride, drive or lead any animal, or move, drive, run, or propel any vehicle
       over or across any curb unless such curb has been lowered or otherwise constructed or
       reconstructed to form a suitable crossing, and permission to lower, construct, or
       reconstruct such curb or crossing having first been obtained in writing from the City
       Engineer. No planks or other material shall be placed in any gutter or ditch or against
       any curb for the purpose of making a crossing except as a temporary expedient and with
      the written permission of the City Engineer; and such person shall, before obtaining such
      written permission of the City Engineer, furnish security to the satisfaction of the
      Engineer to an amount at least equal to the estimated cost of constructing such
      temporary crossing as aforesaid.

                   DRIVING ON SIDEWALK OR BOULEVARD PROHIBITED

80.   (1)    No person shall ride, drive, or lead any animal, or move, drive, run or propel any
             vehicle (except light carriages or chairs for the conveyance of children or
             invalids), along, over, or across any sidewalk or boulevard except at:

             (a)     Lane crossings or sidewalk crossings specially constructed for vehicular
                     traffic.

             (b)     Locations for which the City Engineer has granted written permission and
                     then subject only to the conditions contained in such permission.

      (2)    The City Engineer shall not grant permission, pursuant to section 80(1)(b), for a
             crossing to facilitate the movement of building materials and construction
             equipment unless the applicant therefor has first paid to the City the applicable
             fee, exclusive of a goods and services tax imposed under the Excise Tax Act
             (Canada), according to the following table:

        Type of construction requiring crossing permission                    Permit fee
        Addition or renovation only – Single Detached House, Duplex,          $371.00
        or Commercial building
        Single Detached House and Duplex                                      $636.86
        Single Detached House and Duplex with building demolition             $902.87
        Multiple Dwelling or Commercial building without excavation         $2,756.61
        Multiple Dwelling or Commercial building less than 3 storeys        $5,177.38
        in height with excavation
        Multiple Dwelling or Commercial building 3 storeys or more in      $10,302.46
        height with excavation
        Major Development Site, ½ block or larger                          $12,326.34
        Demolition only - multiple dwelling or commercial building less     $1,269.25
        than ½ block in size
        Demolition only - multiple dwelling or commercial building ½        $2,272.51
        block or larger

      (3)   The City Engineer may, as a condition to the granting of permission pursuant to
             section 80(1)(b):

             (a)     require that a bond or some other satisfactory form of security be
                     deposited with or furnished to the City in an amount adequate to
                     guarantee replacement of sidewalks or boulevards to their original
                     condition or to repair any City property in case of damage and for any
                     clean up needed as a consequence of the crossing; and

              (b)    require that proof of commercial general liability insurance or wrap-up
                     insurance, to the satisfaction of the Director of Risk Management, naming
                     the City as an additional named insured, be provided.

      REGULATING ADVERTISING DEVICES AND PROHIBITION AGAINST LITTERING

81.    (1)    No person shall drive or propel along any street in the City any vehicle bearing or
              carrying any advertising device of a temporary character unless permission in
              writing therefor has first been obtained from the Chief Constable of the City.

       (2)    No person shall operate or stand or park on any street any vehicle for the sole or
              primary purpose of displaying advertising, without first having obtained
              permission therefor from the Council.

       (3)    No person shall operate, stand or park any vehicle upon any street for the
              purpose of displaying it for sale.

       (4)    No person shall drive, operate, stand or park a sound truck on any street without
              first having obtained permission therefor from the Council.

82.    Persons Carrying Advertising Devices.

       No person shall carry any advertising device on or along any street without first having
       obtained permission therefor in writing from the City Engineer.

83.    (1)    Defacing Sidewalk.

              No person shall mark or imprint or in any other manner whatsoever deface any
              sidewalk in the City.

       (2)    No person shall place or allow to remain on any street any advertising device
              without first having obtained permission from the City Engineer and the City
              Engineer is hereby authorized to remove any advertising device found on any
              street in contravention of this section. The owner may recover such advertising
              device upon payment to the City of all costs incurred in removing the same.
              Where such advertising device is not claimed within 30 days of its removal, it
              may be destroyed.

84.    Depositing Rubbish or Refuse

       (1)    No person shall deposit upon any street or other public place, any rubbish,
              sweepings, leaves, construction or demolition debris, paper, handbills, refuse or
              other discarded materials or things.

       (2)    An owner, registered owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle must not cause,
              permit, suffer or allow that vehicle to be used in the depositing of any rubbish,
              sweepings, leaves, construction or demolition debris, paper, handbills, refuse or
              other discarded materials or things upon a street.

       (3)    No owner or occupier of real property shall cause, permit or allow any rubbish,
              sweepings, leaves, construction or demolition debris, paper, handbills, refuse or
              other discarded materials or things to be removed from the real property and
              deposited on a street or other public place.

84A.   Distributing Handbills, Etc.

       No person shall distribute advertising matter to persons on any street if it is likely to be
       thrown or left upon a street.

85.    Placing Handbills, Etc. in Vehicle.

       No person shall place or cause to be placed any handbill, dodger, circular, card or other
       advertising matter upon or in any vehicle upon a street without permission of the owner
       or person in charge of such vehicle.

85A.   Defacing Poles.

       No person shall paint, paste, stick or affix or put any sign, bill, notice, substance or thing
       on any street furniture, light standard, electric light, telephone or other pole located on
       any street, and no person shall deface or disfigure such street furniture, light standard,
       electric light, telephone or other pole located on any street, or permit, suffer or allow any
       person to commit the acts on his or her behalf, except that this section does not apply to
       a person:

              (a)     installing signs authorized by the City Engineer on or over City streets
                      and intended to control traffic or parking, or to provide directions or street
                      identification;

              (b)     putting up or installing street decorations authorized by the City Engineer;

              (c)     putting up or installing any public notice or other temporary sign, which is
                      authorized by By-law or by Provincial or Federal legislation;

              (d)     installing advertising devices, which are integral with public conveniences
                      as covered by special agreements with the City, such as bus shelter
                      advertising, map stand advertising or automated public toilet advertising;

              (e)     placing a sign or notice on a free standing kiosk or other structure on a
                      street, which is provided or authorized by the City Engineer, specifically
                      for free public use for the posting of notices or for the purpose of political
                      expression;

              (f)     installing such other devices or fixtures as are authorized by an
                      agreement with the City; or

              (g)     attaching a bicycle, by way of a locking device, to a bike rack.

                                      CLOSING STREETS

86.   Where owing to work of construction, repair, or maintenance, or owing to damage by
      accident or storm or other emergency, any street or any portion thereof is unsafe or
      unsuitable for traffic, or where a parade or other procession authorized by the Chief
      Constable, a street festival, a race or an activity connected with the production of a
      motion picture, a television production or other event requires that traffic be restricted on
      or diverted from a street, the City Engineer or the Chief Constable, or any person duly
      authorized by either of them, may temporarily close such street or portion thereof to
      vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic or both or otherwise restrict or divert the traffic thereon
      or therefrom, and for that purpose may place thereon lamps, barriers, signs, notices, or
      other warnings; and no person shall enter or travel upon such street or portion thereof so
      closed, or enter upon or travel thereon contrary to the restrictions placed there or
      remove, damage, alter or destroy, or attempt to remove, damage, alter or destroy any
      lamp, barrier, sign, notice, or warning so placed. Where a street is closed for the making
      of a motion picture, television production, festival, race or other event, Council may, by
      resolution, levy a fee for the use of such closed street or portion thereof.

                    EXCAVATIONS TO BE PROTECTED OR GUARDED

87.   Every person who shall make any excavation for any purpose adjoining or adjacent to
      any street within the City, shall build and maintain a good and sufficient fence or other
      barrier along the line of such street so as to effectively guard such excavation and to
      protect and guard persons, horses, and vehicles travelling along such street against
      danger, risk or accident by reason of such excavation.

                                  REGULATION OF PARADES

88.   (1)     "Parade" means any procession or body of pedestrians (except members of the
              Armed Forces) numbering more than 30, standing, marching or walking on any
              street or sidewalk, or any group of vehicles numbering 10 or more (except funeral
              processions) standing or moving on any street.

      (2)     No such person shall be a member of, or take part in, any parade unless:

              (a)     such parade be under the direction or control and in charge of some one
                      person as marshal or organizer, and

              (b)     a written permit for such parade has been issued to such marshal or
                      organizer by the Chief Constable, as hereinafter provided, and

              (c)     flags are carried or displayed as hereinafter provided.

       (3)    No parade shall be held unless application therefor has been made in writing to
              the Chief Constable by the marshal or organizer or other person in charge
              thereof at least 90 days or within such shorter period of time as may be allowed
              by the Chief Constable before the parade commences. Such application shall
              specify the nature of the parade, the day and hour on or at which such parade is
              to be held, the place or places of formation or commencement thereof, the route
              intended to be taken, the point of disbandment or dispersal of same, and the
              approximate length thereof. If, in the opinion of the Chief Constable any parade
              requires the placing of traffic control devices, the Chief Constable shall not issue
              a permit therefor without first having received notice from the City Engineer that a
              deposit in the form of cash or a certified cheque in the amount of $50.00 has
              been received by the City Engineer to cover the cost and expense of placing
              such traffic control devices. The City Engineer shall return any unexpended
              balance of the said deposit to the person making the same within 2 weeks after
              the parade has been held.

       (4)    The Chief Constable may issue a permit for a parade subject to any directions
              the Chief Constable may impose as to time, route, or otherwise. If any deviation
              from such direction is made, or if such direction be not otherwise complied with
              (save as directed by the Chief Constable), the permit shall be void and of no
              effect. Provided always that no permit shall be issued for a parade to be held in
              the central district during normal and regular shopping hours without the prior
              approval of the Board of Administration.

       (5)    The national flag of Canada, the Union Jack flag, and the flag of the Province of
              British Columbia, each unfurled and measuring not less than 1 metre by 2 metres
              in size, shall be prominently, properly and continuously displayed at the head of
              each parade. If any flags or emblems of other nations, societies, organizations
              or associations are displayed, the same shall be displayed either in line and on
              the marching left of, or behind the national flag of Canada, the Union Jack flag
              and the flag of the Province of British Columbia and shall not be higher than the
              same.

                   REGULATING THE DRILLING OR EXCAVATING OF TEST HOLES

88A.   (1) A person may apply to the City Engineer, in form prescribed by the City Engineer, for
           a street use permit to drill or excavate test holes in a street to obtain geotechnical or
           environmental soil contamination information regarding adjacent real property or to
           obtain other information approved by the City Engineer.

       (2)   Along with the application, the applicant must submit to the City Engineer:

             (a)    drawings showing the details of each drill hole site; and

             (b)    an application fee of $741.36 for each drill hole site referred to in the
                    application, and an inspection fee of $96.39 for each of two inspections of
                    each drill hole site, the first such inspection being prior to drilling activities
                    and the second after restoration of the pavement and boulevard surfaces.

       (3)   If a drill hole site does not conflict with existing underground utilities, the City
             Engineer may issue a street use permit, subject to such conditions as to
             restoration of the pavement and boulevard surfaces of the street, repair of any
             damage to the street or things in the street caused by the drilling or excavation, or
             other matters, as the City Engineer considers necessary.

       (4)   If the City Engineer conducts more than two inspections of any drill hole site, the
             street use permit holder must pay a further fee of $97.32 on demand for each
             inspection of each site.

                                           PART III

                REGULATING THE SIZE, WEIGHT AND USE OF VEHICLES
                      DIMENSIONS OF VEHICLES AND LOADS

89.    (1)   Subject to the provisions of section 94, no person shall drive or operate on any
             City street:

             (a)     a vehicle having a total outside width, unladen or with load, in excess of
                     2.6 metres;

             (b)     a vehicle having a height unladen or with load in excess of 3.81 metres;
                     provided, however, that any vehicle unladen or with load not exceeding
                     4.15 metres in height may travel on any truck route;

             (c)     a single vehicle having a length inclusive of front and rear bumpers and
                     load in excess of 12.5 metres;

             (d)     a combination of vehicles having a length, inclusive of front and rear
                     bumpers and load, in excess of 23.5 metres, except as provided in
                     subsection (e);

             (e)     an A Train or C train having an overall length, with or without load, in
                     excess of 26.0m; or

             (f)     a B train having an overall length, with or without load, in excess of
                     27.5m.

                           PROHIBITION ON USE OF VEHICLES

89A.   (1)   No person shall drive, operate, or propel:

             (a)     on any City street or other public place, any internal combustion motor
                     vehicle, including any internal combustion motorized push-scooter or
                     skateboard, except for internal combustion motor vehicles that the Motor
                     Vehicle Act permits to operate on streets; or

             (b)     despite section 63A.(1), any motor vehicle on any path adjacent to a
                   seawall or on any seawall, except for a motorized wheelchair, a motor
                   assisted cycle or an electric kick scooter.

      (2)   Use of any motor vehicle in contravention of section 89A(1) may result in its
            impoundment under the Impounding By-law.

                         PROHIBITION ON DRIVING OR LOADING
                            VEHICLE WITH EXCESS WEIGHT

90.   (1)   A person must not:

            (a)    drive a vehicle on a street;

            (b)    suffer or allow or require another person to drive a vehicle on a street;

            (c)    load a vehicle to drive on a street; or

            (d)    suffer or allow or require another person to load a vehicle to drive on a
                   street;

            unless such person complies with subsection (2) or with section 94.

      (2)   With respect to a vehicle referred to in subsection (1):

            (a)    the gross weight on any axle must not exceed 9,100 kilograms unless
                   subsection 2(b) applies;

            (b)    the gross weight on any axle to be driven on any transit route as part of
                   the street passenger transportation system must not exceed 10,000
                   kilograms;

            (c)    the gross weight of any axle combination must comply with the
                   requirements stipulated in Appendices “A” to “K” of the Commercial
                   Transport Regulations as adopted under the Commercial Transport Act
                   and in effect (date of enactment), and the vehicles subject to the
                   requirements of Appendices “B”, “E”, “F”, “H” and “I” must also comply
                   with Schedule “A” to this By-law;

            (d)    the gross weight on any wheel must not exceed 100 kilograms per
                   centimetre of width of pneumatic tire;

            (e)    the gross weight on any wheel must not exceed 100 kilograms per
                   centimetre of width of metal or solid rubber tire;

            (f)    the gross weight on any wheel to be driven on any transit route as part of
                   the street passenger transportation system must not exceed 110
                   kilograms per centimetre of width of pneumatic, metal, or solid rubber tire;

              (g)    the gross vehicle weight must not exceed the combined maximum legal
                     weight of all the axles or axle units on a vehicle or combination of
                     vehicles; and

              (h)    the gross vehicle weight must not exceed the licensed vehicle weight of
                     the vehicle.

       (3)    In measuring the distance between the centres of any group of axles where the
              distance is found to be equal to a number in Schedule A, plus exactly 15
              centimetres, the next highest number shall be used.

       (4)    Nothing contained in this section regarding the weights of vehicles shall relieve
              the driver or operator of any vehicle from complying with the load limits
              applicable to or posted on any bridge or elevated structure.

                                       TRUCK ROUTES

90A.   Downtown, but not including the area:

              (a)    bounded by Burrard Street, Nelson Street, Cambie Street, and False
                     Creek;

              (b)    bounded by Georgia Street, Cardero Street, Pender Street, Burrard
                     Street, and Burrard Inlet;

              (c)    west of Cardero Street;

              (d)    bounded by Nelson Street, Pacific Boulevard, Quebec Street, and False
                     Creek; or

              (e)    bounded by Prior Street, Main Street, National Avenue, and Quebec
                     Street;

       between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., a combination of vehicles over 15.25
       metres in length may only travel on a designated “Truck Route” as set out in Schedule B.

90B.   Areas Outside the Area Described in Section 90A: A vehicle or combination of vehicles
       having a gross vehicle weight rating or licensed gross vehicle weight in excess of 11,800
       kilograms may only travel on designated Truck Routes, as set out in Schedule B of this
       By-law, and on any other street being the most direct route between a truck route and
       points of origin or destination. This section 90B shall not apply to transit vehicles when
       on approved transit routes.

90C.   A person must not drive a vehicle or combination of vehicles, having a gross vehicle
       weight or licensed gross vehicle weight in excess of 27,000 kilograms, over the Granville
       Street Bridge.

                           TYPES OF VEHICLES AND TIRES

91.   (1)   Subject to the provisions of section 94 no person shall drive or operate on any
            City street:

            (a)    [Deleted]

            (b)    a vehicle other than a horse-drawn vehicle the wheels of which are not
                   equipped with rubber tires in good order. This clause shall not apply to
                   vehicles used in connection with construction work when drawn by
                   another vehicle;

            (c)    a vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires, the thickness of which between
                   the rim of the wheel and the surface of the highway is less than 32
                   millimetres;

            (d)    a vehicle having wheels, tires or tracks constructed or equipped with
                   projected spikes, cleats, ribs, clamps, flanges, lugs, studs, or other
                   attachments or projections which extend beyond the tread or traction
                   surface of the wheel, tread or track; provided however, that nothing in this
                   clause is intended to prohibit the use of snow chains during the period
                   from October 1st to April 30th; and provided further that nothing in this
                   clause is intended to prohibit the use at any time between October 1st
                   and April 30th, of studs that do not protrude more than 3 millimetres from
                   the tread or traction surface of a tire if,

                   (i)    there is not more than a total of 130 studs in the tire if it is a tire for
                          a motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of not more than
                          4,500 kilograms, or 175 studs in the tire if it is a tire for a motor
                          vehicle having a greater gross vehicle weight; and

                   (ii)   no studs are used in a tire on the front wheel of a motor vehicle
                          unless each rear wheel has at least one studded tire.

                   Whenever the Minister of Highways suspends the application of section
                   19.03 of the Motor Vehicle Act Regulations dealing with the use of tire
                   studs, the City Engineer is hereby authorized to suspend the use of tire
                   studs as authorized by this subsection, with respect to any particular
                   vehicles or class of vehicle, for a similar period of time and shall, upon
                   taking such action cause notice thereof to be publicly advertised;

            (e)    a straddle truck unless such vehicle conforms to all provincial and City
                   laws and complies with the following conditions:

                   (i)    the length of load carried shall not exceed 8.6 metres;

                   (ii)   the load carried shall not extend more than 185 centimetres in
                          front of the vehicle;

                   (iii)   wheels and chains shall be equipped with guards approved by the
                           Superintendent of the Motor Vehicle Inspection Station for the
                           City;

                   (iv)    the straddle truck shall be equipped with a single device approved
                           pursuant to the regulations under the Motor Vehicle Act and
                           mounted on the vehicle at a height not exceeding 127 centimetres
                           from the ground and in a manner satisfactory to the
                           Superintendent of the Motor Vehicle Inspection Station for the
                           City;

                   (v)     the straddle truck is so designed that the driver has a clear view of
                           the roadway at and beyond a point 9 metres in front of the vehicle
                           measured from the foremost portion of the front of the vehicle;

            (f)    a vehicle equipped with a boom, crane or similar projection extending:

                   (i)     a distance greater than 1 metre beyond the foremost portion of the
                           vehicle when the projection is less than 3 metres above the
                           ground;

                   (ii)    a distance greater than 3.7 metres beyond the foremost portion of
                           the vehicle when the projection is more than 3 metres above the
                           ground; provided however, that such boom or crane projection
                           shall not be more than 4.3 metres above the ground; and provided
                           further that a vehicle equipped with such a boom or crane
                           projection shall not be driven at a greater rate of speed than 30
                           kilometres per hour;

            (g)    a vehicle with a boom crane or similar projection unless such projection is
                   equipped with lights that light up the forward end of such projection so
                   that it may be clearly seen from both the front and side of such vehicle.
                   Such lights shall be lighted at all times in accordance with regulations
                   pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Act regarding headlights.

                                         SPEEDS

92.   (1)   No person shall drive or operate on any City street:

            (a)    a solid rubber-tired vehicle at a greater speed than 20 kilometres per
                   hour;

            (b)    a vehicle having an axle load, tire load or gross load in excess of the
                   limits prescribed by this by-law at a greater rate of speed than that set out
                   in the permit authorizing such operation.

      (2)   No person shall drive a vehicle on any City street at such at rate of speed as to
            impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when
            reduced speed is necessary for safe driving or operation or in compliance with
             the law.

                                       EXEMPTIONS

93.   The provisions of this by-law governing size, weight, load or speed shall not apply to
      vehicles operated by the City Fire Department or to vehicles operated by the City and
      B.C. Electric Company while engaged in snow clearing or road sanding.

                                         PERMITS

94.   (1)    (a)    No person shall drive or operate a vehicle on any City street, either
                    unladen or with load, exceeding any of the limitations contained in this by-
                    law unless a permit in writing therefor has been issued pursuant to this
                    section by the City Engineer;

             (b)    the owner or operator of any vehicle desiring a permit required pursuant
                    to clause (a) shall make application in writing therefor to the City Engineer
                    giving such particulars therein as the City Engineer may require;

             (c)    subject to the provisions of subsection (2) hereof the City Engineer may,
                    notwithstanding the provisions of this by-law, by special permit in writing
                    authorize the operation and driving of vehicles which are otherwise
                    prohibited by this by-law from being operated or driven on City streets;

             (d)    the operating and driving of any vehicle for which the permit has been
                    issued shall at all times be subject to the conditions stated therein;

             (e)    such permit shall be carried in the vehicle whenever it is being driven on
                    City streets and shall be produced to any police officer for inspection upon
                    request.

      (2)    The City Engineer may grant:

             (a)    a permit authorizing a single trip for any vehicle which exceeds the
                    limitations set out in this by-law regarding weights, loads and size. An
                    application for such permit shall be made not less than 24 hours in
                    advance of the time the trip is to be made;

             (b)    a permit authorizing more than one trip for any vehicle which exceeds the
                    limitations of this by-law regarding weights, loads and size, subject
                    however, to the following conditions:

                    (i)    such permit shall be valid for a period not exceeding 12 months
                           and in any event shall expire on the last day of February in every
                           year;

                    (ii)   if the vehicle or the vehicle and load together do not exceed 3.2
                           metres in width, 4.5 metres in height, or 23 metres in length there
                           shall be no limitation on the number of trips to be made unless
                               considered necessary by the City Engineer;

                      (iii)    [Deleted]

                      (iv)     if the trips are confined to a route or routes approved by the City
                               Engineer.

      (3)    A permit issued pursuant to this section may, in addition to any other limitations,
             prohibit the operation or driving of the vehicle concerned on any through street or
             transit route or on any street within the downtown during the periods from 7:00
             a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.

      (4)    When a permit is issued for more than one trip with respect to the weight, height
             or width of a vehicle, such permit may specify the maximum rate of speed at
             which such vehicle may travel and no driver or operator of a vehicle under permit
             shall drive such vehicle in excess of the speed specified.

      (5)    When a permit is issued for more than one trip with respect to the width of a
             vehicle, such vehicle shall be equipped with clearance lights as required by the
             Motor Vehicle Act and the Regulations made thereunder and red flags to indicate
             to drivers of approaching and following vehicles the width of the vehicle and the
             load being carried and such clearance lights shall be lighted at all times in
             accordance with regulations pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Act regarding
             headlights.

      (6)    Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to immediate
             cancellation in the event of any condition of the said permit being violated or in
             the event of false information being given by the applicant.

      (7)    If the vehicle or the vehicle and load together exceed 4.3 metres in width, 24.4
             metres in length or 4.5 metres in height or a straddle truck with load exceeds 8.6
             metres in length, the City Engineer may require that such vehicle straddle truck
             be preceded and/or followed by a pilot car suitably identified with red flags and/or
             flashing lights, satisfactory to the City Engineer and Chief Constable.

95.   Before any permit is issued pursuant to section 94 the applicant shall deposit with the
      City a bond of indemnity or a copy of an insurance policy to secure payment to the City
      of the cost of repairing or reconstructing any street or other property of the City damaged
      by reason of the driving or operating of the vehicle for which the permit is granted. Such
      bond or insurance policy shall be in the amount prescribed by the City Engineer and
      shall be in a form satisfactory to the Director of Legal Services.

                                             PERMIT FEES

96.   The City Engineer may charge the following fees, exclusive of a goods and services tax
      imposed under the Excise Tax Act (Canada), for any permit issued pursuant to section
      94:

             - For a permit authorizing a single trip ............................................. $39.68
              - For a permit authorizing more than one trip ................................ $378.44

96A.   If a permit issued pursuant to section 94 has been lost or destroyed before expiring, the
       holder thereof shall make application for a duplicate permit to replace that which has
       been lost, and the City Engineer, upon being satisfied as to the circumstances of such
       loss or destruction, may issue a duplicate permit upon payment by the applicant of the
       fee of $5.00.
                         WEIGHING AND INSPECTION OF VEHICLES

97.    (1)    Any person driving or operating a vehicle on any street, when so directed by a
              police officer or by any person authorized by the City Engineer, shall:

              (a)     stop such vehicle at such time and place as directed for the purpose of
                      weighing, measuring, or inspecting the vehicle or load carried or for any
                      other purpose;

              (b)     drive the vehicle to the nearest public scales for the purpose of weighing
                      such vehicle;

              (c)     re-arrange the load upon the vehicle or remove the whole or any part of
                      the load from the vehicle as may be necessary to comply with the
                      provisions of this by-law before continuing to drive or operate such
                      vehicle.

98.    [Deleted]

                        SPILLING OF VEHICLE LOADS ON STREETS
                                  SECURING OF LOADS

99.    (1)    (a)     It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle and also the duty of the
                      owner of any commercial vehicle to ensure that any load or covering
                      thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent such covering or load from
                      becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard to other users of
                      the highway.

              (b)     If any article, substance or material blows, drops, spills or falls from a
                      vehicle onto a street, the driver of the vehicle must immediately take all
                      reasonable precautions to safeguard traffic and remove the article,
                      substance or material from the street.

       (2)    (a)     No person shall drive, ride or propel any vehicle containing any sawdust,
                      solid waste, liquid waste, dirt, gravel, rocks or other loose material, on any
                      street in the City unless such vehicle shall be kept tightly and securely
                      covered in such manner as to prevent any of such sawdust, solid waste,
                      liquid waste, dirt, gravel, rocks or other loose material from being blown,
                      dropped or spilled from such vehicle.

              (b)     No person shall drive or operate any vehicle loaded with firewood unless
                      such firewood is contained in a box so designed and constructed that the
                     said firewood does not protrude more than 30 centimetres above the
                     lowest point of the top of such box.

       (3)    The driver or operator of any vehicle carrying loads of lumber or other structural
              materials shall:

              (a)    securely chain the load using at least 2 chains for loads not exceeding 3.2
                     metres in height measured from the ground and at least 3 chains for
                     loads exceeding 3.2 metres in height, and one additional chain for every 3
                     metres of deck space in excess of 6 metres; provided however, that the
                     driver or operator of a straddle truck shall be deemed to have complied
                     with the provisions of this clause when the load is mechanically clamped
                     and secured in position;

              (b)    place the load so that not less than two-thirds of the bulk length thereof
                     shall be forward of the rear axle and not more than 4.5 metres thereof
                     shall extend beyond the centre of the last axle of the said vehicle;

              (c)    strip all lumber loads in conformity with the stripping regulations contained
                     in the General Accident Prevention Regulations of the Provincial Workers'
                     Compensation Board;

              (d)    not permit such loads to exceed the following height limitations measured
                     from the ground:
                     Vehicle Weighing                            Maximum Height of Load

                     2,700 kilograms or less                       2.7 metres

                     more than 2,700 kilograms
                     but not exceeding 3,600
                     kilograms                                     3.2 metres

                     over 3,600 kilograms                          3.81metres

       (4)    (a)    Subject to the provisions of Clauses 91(1)(e)(ii) and 91(1)(f)(i) and (ii) the
                     load upon any vehicle or combination of vehicles shall not exceed more
                     than 1 metre beyond the front wheels or bumper.

              (b)    The load upon any privately-owned passenger vehicle shall not extend
                     beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of such vehicle nor more
                     than 15 centimetres beyond the line of the fenders on the right side
                     thereof.

              (c)    A red flag not less than 45 centimetres square shall be carried at the
                     extreme front and extreme rear of any load of logs, poles, or structural
                     materials in single length exceeding an over-all length, including vehicle
                     of 20 metres.

100.   Schedules A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H annexed hereto shall form an integral part of this
       by-law.

101.   This by-law shall also apply to the passageways and driveways on the real property
       known and defined as Exhibition Park.

                                               VIOLATION OF BY-LAW

102.   Every person who offends against any of the provisions of this by-law, or who suffers or
       permits any act or thing to be done in contravention or in violation of any of the
       provisions of this by-law, or who neglects to do or refrains from doing anything required
       to be done by any of the provisions of this by-law, or who does any act or thing which
       violates any of the provisions of this by-law, shall be deemed to be guilty of an infraction
       of this by-law, and shall be liable to the penalties hereby imposed.

       (1)       The owner or lessee of a vehicle shall incur the penalties provided for any
                 violation of this by-law with respect to the vehicle unless at the time of such
                 violation the vehicle was in the possession of some person other than the owner
                 or lessee without the consent of the owner or lessee; but nothing in this section
                 shall relieve an operator of a vehicle who is not the owner or lessee from
                 incurring the penalties provided for any violation.

                                                     PENAL CLAUSE

103.   (1)       Except where any special penalty is provided for, every person who commits an
                 offence against this by-law is liable to a fine and penalty not less than $250.00
                 and not exceeding $2,000.00.

       (2)       Every person who commits an offence against one of the following provisions of
                 this By-law is liable to a fine of not less than the amount set out opposite each
                 provision:

                 17.6(e)……………………………………………………………………………$90.00

                 17.6(f) and 65……………………………………………………………………$90.00

                 64 ............................................................................................................ $75.00

                 17.1(b), 17.2(a)(ii), 17.2(b), 17.2(c), 17.2(d)(ii), 17.2(e) through (j) inclusive,
                 17.4(e)(ii), 17.4(f)(ii), 17.5(a)(ii), 17.5(c)(ii), 17.5(d)(ii), 17.6(a) through (d)
                 inclusive, 17.6(g), 17.6A, 17.7, 18.1(a), 18.1(b)(ii), 18.1(c)(ii), 18.2, 18.3, 19.1,
                 21.1    to    21.7      inclusive,    22.1,   22.4,    23.1,     23.1A    and    23.3
                 ……………………………………………………………………………...$150.00

                 6, 11, 12, 14, 15, 20.1, 20.2, 32 to 46 inclusive, 50, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 60, 60A to
                 60F inclusive, 63A, and 65A(2) ..................................................................... $150.00

                 17.1(a), 17.2(a)(i). 17.2(d)(i), 17.2(k) through (m) inclusive,17.3, 17.4(a) through
                 (d) inclusive, 17.4(e)(i), 17.4(f)(i), 17.5(a)(i), 17.5(b), 17.5(c)(i), 17.5(d)(i),

      18.1(b)(i),         18.1(c)(i),                                         and
      48…..……………………………………………..............................................$200.00

      21.7A ........................................................................................................... .$400.00

      58, 87, 88, 94(1)(a), 94(1)(d), 94(1)(e), 94(7), 99(1)(b),
      99(2)(a) ................................................................................................. $500.00

      76B……………………………………………………………………$499.00

(3)         Every person who commits an offence against the provisions of subsection
            (1) of section 90 of this by-law is liable to a fine and penalty of $250.00 plus:

            (a)        $20.00 for each 100 kilograms, or part thereof, up to 3,000 kilograms;

            (b)        $30.00 for each 100 kilograms, or part thereof, from 3,001 kilograms
                       up to 5,000 kilograms; and

            (c)        $100.00 for each 100 kilograms, or part thereof, greater than 5,000
                       kilograms;

            of the gross weight or gross vehicle weight that exceeds that allowed under
            section 90(2).

(4)         Every person who commits an offence against the provisions of subsection
            (2) of section 99 of this by-law is liable to a fine and penalty of $250.00 plus:

            (a)        $250.00 if the vehicle load consists of solid waste and building debris
                       or either of them; and

            (b)        $250.00 if the length of the material loaded on the vehicle exceeds
                       10 metres.

(5)         Every person who commits an offence against the provisions of subsection
            (2) of section 65A of this by-law is liable to a fine and penalty not exceeding
            $2000.00.

(6)         Every person who commits an offence against the provisions of sections
            71A, 71B(4), 71B(5) or 71B(6) is liable to a fine of not less than $1,000.00
            and not more than $5,000.00.

(7)         Every person who commits an offence against the provisions of section 69A
            is liable to a fine of not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $10,000.00,
            unless a provision of the Ticket Offences By-law authorizes a lower fine.

(8)         Every person who commits an offence against the provisions of sections
            30(2) or 30(6) of this by-law is liable to a fine of not less than $1,000.00 and
            not more than $50,000.

(9)         Every person who commits an offence against section 84 of this by-law is
            liable to a maximum fine of $10,000.00.

104.   [Amending By-laws - Not Printed in this Consolidation]

105. This By-law shall come into force and take effect on and after the date of the final
passing hereof.

              DONE AND PASSED in open Council this 30th day of October, 1944.

                                                           (Signed)        “J.W. Cornett”
                                                                                  Mayor

                                                           (Signed)      “FRED Howlett”
                                                                             City Clerk

                                      SCHEDULE A

Distance Between the Centres of                    Maximum
the First Axle and Last Axle                       Allowable Gross
of any Axle Unit of a                              Weight on that
Vehicle or Combination of Vehicles                 Axle Unit

Centimetres                                        Kilograms

less than 100                                             9 100
100 and up to but not including 120                      16 500
120 and up to but not including 190                      17 000
190 and up to but not including 230                      18 000
230 and up to but not including 260                      19 000
260 and up to but not including 300                      20 000
300 and up to but not including 340                      21 000
340 and up to but not including 380                      22 000
380 and up to but not including 420                      23 000
420 and up to but not including 460                      24 000
460 and up to but not including 500                      25 000
500 and up to but not including 530                      26 000
530 and up to but not including 570                      27 000
570 and up to but not including 610                      28 000
610 and up to but not including 650                      29 000
650 and up to but not including 690                      30 000
690 and up to but not including 720                      31 000
720 and up to but not including 760                      32 000
760 and up to but not including 800                      33 000
800 and larger                                           34 000
                                          SCHEDULE B

All streets in and bordering on any industrial district under the Zoning and Development By-law.

   1.      Abbott Street: from Expo Boulevard to Pacific Boulevard.

   2.      Alma Street - Dunbar Diversion - Dunbar Street: from 4th Avenue to South-West
           Marine Drive.

   3.      Anderson Street (Granville Island).

   4.      Arbutus Street - West Boulevard: from Broadway to 41st Avenue.

   5.      Argyle Drive - Argyle Street: from Victoria Drive to South East Marine Drive.

   6.      Barnard Street: from South-West Marine Drive to 75th Avenue.

   7.      Blanca Street: from 4th Avenue to 10th Avenue.

   8.      Boundary Road: from Hastings Street to Marine Way.

   9.      Broadway - Lougheed Highway: from Alma Street to Boundary Road.

   10.     Burrard Street - Burrard Bridge: from Waterfront Road Access Ramp to Broadway.

   11.     Cambie Street: from Nelson Street to Pacific Boulevard.

   12.     Cambie Street - Cambie Bridge: from Pacific Boulevard to South-West Marine Drive.

   13.     Cartwright Street (Granville Island).

   14.     Clark Drive - Knight Street: from Stewart Street (Vancouver Port Corporation) to
           Knight Street Bridge.

   15.     Commercial Drive - Victoria Drive: from Broadway to Argyle Drive.

   16.     Cordova Street - Cordova Diversion: from Main Street to Powell Street.

   17.     Davie Street: from Denman Street to Burrard Street.

   18.     Denman Street: from Georgia Street to Davie Street.

   19.     Dundas Street - Powell Street: from Main Street to Nanaimo Street.

   20.     Dunlevy Avenue: from Hastings Street to Alexander Street.

   21.     Dunsmuir Street - Dunsmuir Viaduct: Burrard Street to Gore Avenue.

   22.     Duranleau Street (Granville Island).
                                                   i
23.   Expo Boulevard: Pacific Boulevard to Quebec Street.

24.   Fraser Street: from Broadway to South-East Marine Drive.

25.   Georgia Street - Georgia Viaduct: from Burrard Street to Gore Avenue.

26.   Georgia Street: from Denman Street to Burrard Street.

27.   Gore Avenue: from Hastings Street to Alexander Street.

28.   Gore Avenue: from Union Street to Prior Street.

29.   Grandview Highway - Grandview Highway South: from Nanaimo Street to Boundary
      Road.

30.   Granville Street – Granville Bridge: from north Granville Loops to South-West Marine
      Drive.

31.   Hastings Street: from Main Street to Boundary Road.

32.   Heatley Avenue: Waterfront Road (Vancouver Port Corporation) to Hastings Street.

33.   Howe Street: from Dunsmuir Street to Howe Street on-ramp.

34.   Jackson Avenue: from Hastings Street to Alexander Street.

35.   Johnston Street (Granville Island).

36.   Joyce Street - 29th Avenue: from 41st Avenue to Boundary Road.

37.   King Edward Avenue: from Macdonald Street to Quesnel Drive.

38.   Kingsway: from Main Street to Boundary Road.

39.   Macdonald Street - from Broadway to King Edward Avenue.

40.   McGill Street: from Nanaimo Street to Highway 1.

41.   Main Street: from Waterfront Road (Vancouver Port Corporation) to South-East
      Marine Drive.

42.   Nanaimo Street: from McGill Street to Kingsway.

43.   Oak Street: from Broadway to South-West Marine Drive.

44.   Pacific Boulevard - Pacific Street: from Burrard Street to Quebec Street.
45.   Princess Avenue: from Hastings Street to Alexander Street.

                                            ii
46.   Prior Street - Venables Street: from Main Street to Clark Drive.

47.   Quebec Street: from 2nd Avenue to Keefer Street.

48.   Quesnel Drive - MacKenzie Street: from King Edward Avenue to 41st Avenue.

49.   Renfrew Street: from McGill Street to Grandview Highway.

50.   Rupert Street: from First Avenue to Kingsway.

51.   Seymour Street: Seymour Street off-ramp to Dunsmuir Street

52.   South-West Marine Drive - 70th Avenue: from Camosun Street to South-West
      Marine Drive (East of Heather Street).

53.   South-West Marine Drive - South-East Marine Drive - Marine Way: from Granville
      Street to Boundary Road.

54.   Terminal Avenue: Quebec Street to Clark Drive.

55.   Vancouver Port Corporation Roads: Commissioner Street - Stewart Street -
      Waterfront Road.

56.   Victoria Drive: Powell Street to Hastings Street.

57.   Waterfront Road Access Ramp: from Burrard Street to Waterfront Road.

58.   1st Avenue: from Rupert Street to Boundary Road.

59.   4th Avenue - 4th Avenue Diversion - 4th Avenue: from Drummond Drive to Burrard
      Street.

60.   4th Avenue - 6th Avenue - 2nd Avenue - Great Northern Way - 6th Avenue: from
      Burrard Street to Clarke Drive.

61.   10th Avenue: from Blanca Street to Alma Street.

62.   41st Avenue: from South-West Marine Drive to Joyce Street

                                           iii
SCHEDULE C
(see attached)
                            SCHEDULE D

West End Plateau   means the area bounded by Burrard Street, Davie Street,
                   Denman Street and Robson Street.

West End           means the area bounded by Burrard Street, English Bay, the
                   east side of Stanley Park, Alberni Street west of Denman
                   Street, Denman Street from Alberni Street to Robson Street,
                   and Robson Street from Denman Street to Burrard Street.

Robson North       means the area bounded by Denman Street from Robson
                   Street to Georgia Street, Georgia Street from Denman Street
                   to Nicola Street, Pender Street from Nicola Street to Jervis
                   Street, Melville Street from Jervis Street to Bute Street, Bute
                   Street from Melville Street to Alberni Street, Alberni Street
                   from Bute Street to Burrard Street, Burrard Street from Alberni
                   Street to Robson Street and Robson Street from Burrard
                   Street to Denman Street.

Davie-Beach        means the area bounded by Burrard Street, English Bay and
                   Davie Street.

Denman West        means the area bounded by Denman Street, English Bay, the
                   east side of Stanley Park and Georgia Street.
                                      SCHEDULE E

Sidewalk in the 300 block of Georgia St. (adjacent Library Square)

Sidewalk in the 700 block of Homer St. (adjacent Library Square)

Sidewalk on the west side of Quebec St. (adjacent Science World)

Seawall on the east and north side of False Creek (from Science World to the Cambie
Bridge)

Sidewalk on the 800 block of Robson St. (Adjacent the Art Gallery)

Street allowance adjacent B.C. Transit Sky Train Stations

Sidewalk on 200 Block of Georgia (adjacent QE Theatre)

Sidewalk on 600 Block of Hamilton (adjacent QE Theatre)

Sidewalk on the 700 and 800 Blocks of Beatty Street (Adjacent Terry Fox Plaza)

                                             ii
            SCHEDULE F

             RA-1 District
             R1-1 District
             RT-1 District
             RT-2 District
             RT-3 District
       RT-4 and RT-4A Districts
             RT-5 District
             RT-6 District
             RT-7 District
             RT-8 District
             RT-9 District
            RT-10 District
             RM-1 District
             RM-2 District
             RM-3 District
            RM-3A District
             RM-4 District
RM-5, RM-5A, RM-5B and RM-5C Districts
             RM-6 District
             FM-1 District
             FSD District

                  iii
                                 SCHEDULE G

Davie Village - Jim Deva Plaza

                                     iv
                                    Schedule H
                    Priority Congestion Management Roadways

The streets or portions of streets listed below are hereby designated as priority
congestion management roadways for the purposes of section 17.2(k) of this by-
law.

Burrard Bridge.

Cambie Bridge.

Dunsmuir Viaduct.

East 1st Avenue: from Terminal Avenue to Boundary Road.

East 12th Avenue: from Prince Albert Street to Penticton Street.

Georgia Viaduct.

Granville Bridge.

                                      v
                                     SCHEDULE I

1.   Permit Fees for Temporary Occupancy of a Street under Section 30

     The following fees must be paid prior to issuance of a permit, exclusive of sales tax,
     except that no fees are payable for any occupancies that result in only momentary
     interruptions in public use of up to three minutes:

     (a)    for all occupancies of a street, portion of a street, or air space above a street,
            except for occupancies of less than three days on a minor street with no
            parking regulations:
                                                    $3.99 for each 10 m2
                                                    or portion thereof, per day
                                                    with a minimum fee of $135.14

     (b)    in addition to the fee set out in section 1(a), for occupancy of a curb lane:

            (i)     if there are metered spaces:
                                                   $138.46 for the installation and removal
                                                   of signs by City crews to reserve the
                                                   space

                                                   plus

                                                   all lost metered space revenue, at the
                                                   rates set out in the Parking Meter By-
                                                   law

            (ii)    if there are no metered spaces, but other parking regulations exist:

                                                   $138.46 for the installation and removal
                                                   of signs by City crews to reserve the
                                                   space

                                                   plus

                                                   $138.46 per week or portion thereof
                                                   after the first week

            (iii)   if the curb lane is a priority congestion management roadway, in
                    addition to the fees in (i) or (ii):

                                                   $138.46 for each 12 hour period or
                                                   portion thereof

            (iv)    if the curb lane is on a minor street where no parking regulations
                    exist and the occupancy is less than three days:

                                                   no fee, unless the applicant wants a
                                                   curb lane reserved for their exclusive

                                            vi
                                               use, in which case the following fee
                                               applies: $138.46 for the installation and
                                               removal of signs by City crews to
                                               reserve the space

      (v)    if the curb lane is on a minor street where no parking regulations
             exist and the occupancy is three or more days:

                                               $138.46 for the installation and removal
                                               of signs by City crews to reserve the
                                               space

                                               plus

                                               $138.46 per week or portion thereof
                                               after the first week

(c)   in addition to the fee set out in section 1(a), for occupancy of a travel lane:

                                               $110.77 for each 12 hour period or
                                               portion thereof

(d)   in addition to the fee set out in section 1(a), for occupancy of a lane:

                                            $110.77 for each 12 hour period or
                                            portion thereof

(e)   in addition to the fee set out in section 1(a), for occupancy of a sidewalk:

                                            $166.16 for each 12 hour period or
                                               portion thereof

(f)   in addition to the fee set out in section 1(a), for occupancy of a bike lane:

                                               $138.46 for each 12 hour period or
                                               portion thereof

(g)   despite any of the foregoing fees, the only fee payable for the placement of a
      portable toilet on a street is:
                                        $133.59 per portable toilet

(h)   despite any of the foregoing fees, the only fee payable for the placement of
      covered walkways used solely for the protection of the public on a sidewalk
      is:
                                            $135.14

(i)   inspection fee when a deposit is required for restoration of the street, repair
      of City property, or clean up:
                                       $172.09

                                      vii
(j)   traffic management plan review fee when a traffic management plan or traffic
      control plan is required:
                                          $85.59 where the review is less than 1
                                          hour of staff time

                                          $855.86 where the review is 1 to 15
                                          hours of staff time

                                          $2,403.50 where the review is over 15
                                          hours of staff time

                                   viii
                      STREET AND TRAFFIC BY-LAW
                       INDEX - AS AT JUNE 16, 1998

                                                                                       SECTION
Abandoned Vehicles ............................................................... 72A
Advertising
      carried by person ..............................................................82
      distributing handbills ................................................... 84, 85
      on sidewalks .....................................................................83
      on vehicles .............................................................. 81(1)(2)
      vehicle for sale on streets ............................................ 81(3)
Ambulances (see emergency vehicles)
      duty of driver on approach of ............................................50
      following prohibited ...........................................................56
Angle parking .......................................................................... 18.2
Animals ...........................................................................................
      horses not to be frightened ...............................................67
      must be under control .......................................................40
      riding or leading on boulevards or sidewalks ............... 80(1)
      tethering of ................................................................. 74, 75
Axle Load, defined .......................................................................3
Backing of vehicle ............................................................. 39, 39A
BC Transit Bus .................................................................... 3, 17.3
Begging .................................................................................. 70A
Bells
      warning bells on bridges ....................................................52
      on bicycles .................................................................... 60B
Bicycles
      arrest without warrant .................................................... 60F
      bell required on ............................................................. 60B
      headphones prohibited .................................................. 60A
      helmet required ...................................................... 60D, 60E
      keep close to curb ............................................................59
      one hand on handle-bars...................................................41
      pathways designated...................................................... 60C
      riding on sidewalks prohibited ...........................................60
Boulevard, defined .......................................................................3
      riding or driving on ....................................................... 80(1)
      stopping on ............................................................... 17.4(e)
      traffic to keep to right of ....................................................34
Boulevard crossing, defined .........................................................3
      stopping at ............................................................... 17.2 (d)
Bridges
      stopping vehicle on ................................................... 17.2(g)
      warning bells or signal ......................................................52
Bus, defined .................................................................................3
      crossing street in front of ..............................................11(3)

Bus Stop, defined .........................................................................3

                                                   ix
      parking prohibited .......................................................... 17.3
Bus Zone, stopping vehicle on .............................................17.2(j)
Chain, defined...............................................................................3
Chief Constable, defined ..............................................................3
      authority to remove obstructions ........................ 72(4), 73(2)
      powers ................................................................ 4(4), 73(2)
City Engineer, defined ..................................................................3
      authority to place traffic markers, etc. ................... 4(1) to (3)
      authority to remove obstructions ........................ 72(4), 73(2)
      permission to place obstructions ................................. 73(1)
      permit for temporary occupation of streets ................... 30(2)
      may place "Special Zone" signs .............................. 30(3)(4)
      may remove structures, etc. from streets ..................... 71(4)
Coasting on ................................................................................77
Combination of Vehicles, defined .................................................3
Commercial Loading Zone, defined ..............................................3
Commercially Used Property, defined ..........................................3
Commercial Vehicle, defined ........................................................3
      dimensions .......................................................................89
      exemptions .............................................................. 19.2, 93
      permits .................................................................... 21.6, 94
      speeds .............................................................................92
      stopping in lane ............................................................. 19.2
      types of ............................................................................91
      weighing and inspection ...................................................97
      weights .............................................................................90
Construction
      materials on street ............................................................72
Council, defined ...........................................................................3
Crossings, regulated ..................................................................80
Crosswalk, defined .......................................................................3
      driver not to pass standing vehicle at ............................11(4)
      pedestrians to use right half .............................................14
      right-of-way at ......................................................... 11(1)(4)
      stopping vehicle on ................................................... 17.4(a)
      stopping vehicle near ............................................... 17.4(b)
Crowds, obstructing traffic ..........................................................69
Custom Transit Vehicle, defined ...................................................3
      parking in passenger zone ........................................12.2(c)
Curb
      driving over .......................................................................79
      parking or stopping close to .............................. 18.1(a)(b)(c)
Curbed roadway 5m or less in width, no stopping .................17.2(i)
Disabled person parking ......................................................... 21.2
Double parking .................................................................. 19.1(e)
Downtown, defined ......................................................................3
      truck routes ............................................................ 90A, 90B

Driver, defined ..............................................................................3
      care for safety of pedestrian ......................... 11(1)-(4), 12(3)
      must have control of vehicle .............................................40

                                                 x
                  must have hand on steering device ..................................41
                  no part of body extending outside vehicle .........................62
            Emergency Vehicle, defined .........................................................3
                  duty of driver on approach of ............................................50
                  exemptions .................................................................. 49(1)
                  siren to be sounded ..........................................................51
                  following prohibited ...........................................................56
            Encroachments on streets ............................................. 71, 72, 73
            Entertainment on streets .............................................................67
            Event parking .............................................................. 22.1 to 22.4
            Excavation
                  to be protected .................................................................87
                  stopping at ................................................................. 17.2(f)
            Exemptions
                  emergency vehicles ..................................................... 49(1)
                  public utility vehicles .................................................... 49(2)
                  other vehicles .............................................................. 49(3)
                  from parking prohibitions ............................................... 19.2
Exhibition Park driveways ........................................................................ 101
Fire Apparatus (See Emergency Vehicles)
       following prohibited ...........................................................................56
       stopping near when at fire ................................................................56
Fire Department member, may direct traffic at fire ...................................... 58
Fire door, parking near ........................................................................ 19.1(f)
Fire Hall, stopping vehicle in vicinity of ............................................... 17.2(b)
Fire Hose, crossing prohibited ....................................................................57
Fire Hydrant, stopping near .................................................................17.2(c)
Flags, displayed in parades ................................................................... 88(5)
Flashing Signal, regulation of vehicular traffic at ...................................... 7(3)
Flowers, injury prohibited ...........................................................................78
Fuel on streets ...................................................................................... 72(3)
Funeral processions ...................................................................................35
Garage, parking near ......................................................................... 19.1(g)
Garbage Container, defined ..........................................................................3
       stopping at ................................................................................ 17.2(e)
Handbills, distributing ........................................................................ 84A, 85
Hastings Viaduct, stopping ................................................................. 17.2(g)
Holidays, parking rules relaxed .......................................................... 17.6(e)
Horns (See sirens)
       for warning only ................................................................................54
Horses (see animals)
Hotel lobby, parking near .................................................................... 17.6(g)
Ice, removal from sidewalks ........................................................................76
Infraction of by-law ................................................................................... 102
Intersection, defined .....................................................................................3
       entering prohibited when traffic obstructed ....................................... 46
       passing vehicle at .........................................................................11(4)
       pedestrian's right-of-way ........................................................... 7(2), 11
       stopping vehicle within ............................................................... 17.4(f)
       stopping within m.of .................................................................. 17.4(b)
       turning at .................................................................................... 37, 42

                                                               xi
Jaywalk, defined ..........................................................................................3
Lane, defined ...............................................................................................3
       emerging from ..................................................................................36
       speed limit ........................................................................................45
       not considered street for "jaywalking" .................................................3
       stopping when emerging from ..........................................................36
       stopping vehicle near lane intersection ..................................... 19.1(a)
Lights (see traffic-control signals)
Lines, newly painted, driving on prohibited ...................................................9
Litter on streets prohibited ..........................................................................84
Loading Zone, defined .................................................................................3
       commercial vehicles only ............................................................... 21.5
       stopping in ............................................................................ 21.3, 21.4
Loads
       dimensions .......................................................................................89
       exemptions .......................................................................................93
       limits .................................................................................................94
       securing.............................................................................................99
       spilling on streets ..............................................................................99
Loitering prohibited .....................................................................................70
Median, stopping alongside ................................................................ 17.2(h)
Merchandise, sale or display prohibited on street ....................................... 66
Motorcycles (see Vehicles)
Motor vehicles, defined ................................................................................3
Movie productions closing street to facilitate ..............................................86
Moving vehicle to avoid time limit ............................................................ 17.7
Names on vehicles ......................................................................... 21.5, 21.6
Obstructions
       entering intersection when traffic obstructed .....................................46
       not to be placed on streets or sidewalks ............................... 71, 72, 73
       persons obstructing traffic .................................................................69
       sports on streets prohibited ..............................................................67
Offences .................................................................................................. 102
One-way Street, defined ...............................................................................3
       vehicles to move in one direction only ..............................................33
Operation of Horse-Drawn Vehicles ........................................................ 40A
Parade, regulation of ..................................................................................88
Park, parking, parked, defined ............................................................... 3(23)
       (see also Stopping)
       areas designated by City Engineer ................................................ 4(2)
       abutting central boulevard ........................................................ 17.2(h)
       double parking .................................................................. 18.1(a)(b)(c)
       general parking prohibitions .................................................. 17.6, 20.2
       holidays, parking rules relaxed ................................................. 17.6(e)
       in direction of traffic ........................................................... 18.1(a)(b(c)
       large vehicles ................................................................................ 20.1
       more restrictive regulation applies ................................................. 23.1
       on paved, portion of narrow street .............................................17.6(c)
       over-parking ............................................................. 20.1, 22.1 to 22.4
       temporary no parking ..................................................................... 4(4)
       three-hour limit .......................................................................... 17.6(f)

                                                                 xii
      time limit ................................................................................ 17.6(e)(f)
      where traffic signs prohibit ........................................................ 17.6(a)
Park, traffic regulations in ........................................................................ 63A
Park Board, defined .....................................................................................3
      powers of General Manager .......................................................... 4(6)
Parked vehicle, unattended ..................................................................... 18.3
Passengers
      not more than 3 in front seat .............................................................61
      no part of body to extend outside car ................................................62
      not to interfere with driver .................................................................63
Passenger Zone, defined .............................................................................3
      stopping in ............................................................................ 21.1, 21.3
Pedestrian, defined ......................................................................................3
      at other than crosswalks .......................................................... 12(1)(2)
      crossing in front of bus .................................................................11(3)
      control signals ............................................................................... 7(2)
      giving names to police officers ..........................................................16
      obedience to traffic signs ....................................................................6
      regulations at traffic-control signals ................................................ 7(2)
      right-of-way at signals .................................................................... 7(2)
      right-of-way at crosswalks ....................................................... 11(1)(2)
      soliciting rides ...................................................................................15
      use right half of crosswalk ................................................................14
Penalty clause .......................................................................................... 103
Permits
      deposit of bond .................................................................................95
      fees ..................................................................................................96
      general provisions ............................................................................94
      lost or destroyed ............................................................................ 96A
      resident parking .................................................................. 23.1 to 23.4
Playing on street prohibited ........................................................................67
Police Officer, defined ..................................................................................3
      may direct traffic .................................................................................6
      obedience to .......................................................................... 5, 16,60F
Police vehicles (see emergency vehicles)
      following prohibited ...........................................................................56
Posters prohibited ................................................................................... 85A
Private Road, defined ...................................................................................3
      stop when emerging from .................................................................36
      stopping vehicle in front or near ................................................ 17.2(d)
Private Vehicle, defined ................................................................................3
Processions ...............................................................................................35
Property Line, defined ..................................................................................3
      stopping vehicles within 20 feet of ............................................ 17.4(b)
Public Park, defined .....................................................................................3
Public Utility Vehicles, exemptions ........................................................ 49(2)
Railway crossing, stopping at .....................................................................32
Refrigerating unit on commercial vehicle ............................................ 20.2(d)
Refuse, depositing on street........................................................................84
Religious street meetings permitted ...................................................... 69(3)
Repairing of vehicles on streets prohibited .................................................68

                                                                xiii
Repeal clause .......................................................................................... 104
Resident parking privileges ................................................ 22.1 to 22.4, 24.1
Right-of-Way, defined ...................................................................................3
       (see Pedestrian)
Roadway, defined .........................................................................................3
       16 feet or less between curbs, no stopping .................................17.2(i)
School crossings, regulations at .................................................................10
Semi-Trailer, defined ....................................................................................3
Service Vehicle, defined ...............................................................................3
       parking by ................................................................................ 63A(10)
Sidewalk, defined ......................................................................................... 3
       advertising devices on ......................................................................83
       driving on ..........................................................................................80
       entertainment on ...............................................................................67
       obstruction on ............................................................................. 71, 73
       parking within 6 m of ................................................................. 17.5(b)
       parking within 2 m of, lane ........................................................ 19.1(b)
       riding bicycles prohibited on .............................................................60
       snow and ice ....................................................................................76
Sidewalk Crossing, defined ..........................................................................3
       security for damage by vehicles ................................................... 80(3)
       stopping at ................................................................... 17.2(d), 17.4(d)
       vehicles driving over .................................................................... 80(1)
Sight-seeing bus (see Vehicle for Hire)
Sign, defined ................................................................................................3
Signal (see traffic sign, traffic-control signal)
Siren, emergency vehicle to sound ............................................................51
       duty of driver on sounding of ............................................................50
       regulating use of ...............................................................................53
Skateboards ...............................................................................................77
Sledding on streets ....................................................................................77
Slow-moving vehicles to keep close to curb ...............................................59
Snow or ice, removal from sidewalk .......................................... 76, 76A, 76B
Snow clearing, emergency ...................................................................... 65A
Soliciting rides, prohibited ..........................................................................15
Sound Truck, defined ...................................................................................3
       regulated ..................................................................................... 81(4)
Special Zone, temporary use of street ........................................................30
Speed
       commercial vehicles .........................................................................92
       exemptions .......................................................................................93
       limits in designated areas ........................................................... 44, 45

Stop, Stopping (see also Parking)
      defined ...............................................................................................3
      at intersection when traffic obstructed ...............................................46
      at stop signs .....................................................................................32
      close to curb ..................................................................... 18.1(a)(b)(c)
      general stopping prohibitions ............................................. 17.1 to 17.5
      in lanes .......................................................................................... 19.1

                                                                xiv
       on bridges ............................................................................... 17.1, 52
Stop sign
       placed by City Engineer ........................................................... 4(2), 31
       stopping at .......................................................................... 17.2(a), 32
Straddle truck, regulated ................................................................... 91(1)(e)
Street, defined ..............................................................................................3
       coasting or sliding on ........................................................................77
       closing ..............................................................................................86
       driving on streets laned for traffic ......................................................43
       encroachments, debris, etc., prohibited ................................ 71, 72, 73
       entertaining on...................................................................................67
       loitering on ........................................................................................70
       merchandise not to be displayed on .................................................66
       narrow street - parking............................................................... 17.6(c)
       occupancy for construction .......................................................... 30(7)
       playing on prohibited .................................................................. 67, 77
       reservation for class of vehicles ...................................................17.2(j)
       reservation for temporary occupancy ................................................30
       reservation for sledding, etc.............................................................. 77
       through streets .................................................................................31
Street entertainment permit ...................................................................... 67A
Street festival, closing street to facilitate......................................................86
Street Furniture, defined ...............................................................................3
Street Vending ...........................................................................................66
Taxi-cabs (See Vehicles for Hire)
Taxi stands, stopping vehicles in ..........................................................17.2(j)
Theatre lobby, parking near ................................................................ 17.6(g)
Through street, stopping at ........................................................................31
Time Limits - parking ................................................ 17.6(e), 23.1, 20.2(a)(d)
Tires, types of ............................................................................................. 91
Tour Bus Zone ..................................................................................... 3, 21.7
Traffic, defined .............................................................................................3
       crowds obstructing traffic ..................................................................69
       impeding traffic prohibited .................................................................72
       near fires ..........................................................................................58
Traffic lanes
       City Engineer to mark .............................................................. 4(1), 43
       driving within ................................................................................ 43(4)
       passing on the right ..................................................................... 43(5)
       types of lines ....................................................................... 43(1)(2)(3)
       weaving ....................................................................................... 43(6)
Traffic-control Signal, defined .......................................................................3
       flashing signal ................................................................................ 7(3)
       interference with .................................................................................9
       meaning of .........................................................................................7
       obedience to .......................................................................................6
       on bridges ........................................................................................52
       pedestrian regulations at ............................................................... 7(2)
       police officer can supersede ...............................................................5
       unauthorized, prohibited .....................................................................8
       vehicular regulation at ................................................................... 7(1)

                                                                 xv
Traffic Sign, defined .....................................................................................3
       interference with .................................................................................9
       no parking .......................................................... 17.1, 17.2(b), 17.6(a)
       obedience to .......................................................................................6
       placed by City Engineer ....................................................... 4(2)(3), 31
       placed by Chief Constable ......................................................... 4(4)(5)
       unauthorized, prohibited .....................................................................8
Traffic notice, not to be removed ................................................................64
       not to be altered ...............................................................................65
Trailer, defined .............................................................................................3
       parking ................................................................................. 20.2(a)(b)
Transit Route, defined ..................................................................................3
Trees, injury prohibited ...............................................................................78
Trolley: See Bus
Truck Route
       defined ...............................................................................................3
       locations ................................................................................ 90A, 90B
Truck Tractor, defined ...................................................................................3
Turning
       at intersections ........................................................................... 37, 42
       "U" turns or Reverse Turning ............................................................38
       across street .....................................................................................42
Unattended vehicle on grade .................................................................. 18.3
Vehicle, defined ............................................................................................3
       abandoned .................................................................................... 72A
       backing of ................................................................................ 39, 39A
       driver must have hand on steering device ........................................ 41
       exemptions: Emergency and Public Utility ........................................49
       for sale, not to be parked on street .............................................. 81(3)
       in motion, to be under control ...........................................................40
       large, parking restricted .................................................................. 20.1
       private, defined ...................................................................................3
       not to be drive on sidewalk or boulevard ...................................... 80(1)
       security for driving over sidewalk ................................................. 80(2)
       use of horn .......................................................................................54
       washing or repairing on street ..........................................................68
       weight limits ......................................................................................94
       (See also Commercial Vehicle)
Vehicles for Hire
       reserved parking .........................................................................17.2(j)
       stopping at curbs ......................................................................... 48(1)
       stopping in passenger and loading zones ............................. 21.1, 21.3
       stopping in a lane .......................................................................... 19.2
       stopping in designated stands only ...................................................48
Viaducts, stopping on ......................................................................... 17.2(g)
Violation of by-law .................................................................................... 102
Warning bells or signals on bridges ............................................................52
Washing vehicles on streets prohibited ......................................................68
Water not to flow over street .................................................................. 71(3)
Weaving prohibited ............................................................................... 43(6)

                                                                xvi
