SOURCE_URL: https://www.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/fileadmin/Fichiers_client/lois_et_reglements/LoisAnnuelles/en/2019/2019C12A.PDF
VERSION: As enacted: SQ 2019, c 12 (Bill 21), assented to and in force 16 June 2019; English text published by the Québec Official Publisher
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-09
SCOPE: Whole Act as enacted, ss. 1-36 and Schedules I-III. The explanatory notes are not part of the Act and are left out.
GAPS: none within the scope stated. Converted from the official HTML or PDF to plain text; web-page controls, running page headers, page numbers and form feeds removed; amendment-history lines and editor notes kept.
---
AN ACT RESPECTING THE LAICITY OF THE STATE

AS the Québec nation has its own characteristics, one of which is its civil law
tradition, distinct social values and a specific history that have led it to develop
a particular attachment to State laicity;

AS the Québec State stands on constitutional foundations that have been
enriched over the years by the passage of a number of fundamental laws;

AS, in accordance with the principle of parliamentary sovereignty, it is
incumbent on the Parliament of Québec to determine the principles according
to which and manner in which relations between the State and religions are to
be governed in Québec;

AS it is important that the paramountcy of State laicity be enshrined in Québec’s
legal order;

AS the Québec nation attaches importance to the equality of women and men;

AS a stricter duty of restraint regarding religious matters should be established
for persons exercising certain functions, resulting in their being prohibited
from wearing religious symbols in the exercise of their functions;

AS State laicity contributes to the fulfilment of the magistrature’s duty of
impartiality;

AS State laicity should be affirmed in a manner that ensures a balance between
the collective rights of the Québec nation and human rights and freedoms;

THE PARLIAMENT OF QUÉBEC ENACTS AS FOLLOWS:

CHAPTER I
AFFIRMATION OF THE LAICITY OF THE STATE

1.     The State of Québec is a lay State.

2.     The laicity of the State is based on the following principles:

     (1) the separation of State and religions;

     (2) the religious neutrality of the State;
     (3) the equality of all citizens; and

     (4) freedom of conscience and freedom of religion.

3. State laicity requires parliamentary, government and judicial institutions
to comply with all the principles listed in section 2, in fact and in appearance,
in pursuing their missions.

     For the purposes of this chapter,

  (1) “parliamentary institutions” means the National Assembly and the
persons appointed or designated by it to an office under its authority;

   (2) “government institutions” means the bodies listed in paragraphs 1 to 10
of Schedule I;

   (3) “judicial institutions” means the Court of Appeal, the Superior Court,
the Court of Québec, the Human Rights Tribunal, the Professions Tribunal and
the municipal courts.

4.    In addition to the requirement under section 3, State laicity requires
compliance with the prohibition on wearing religious symbols under Chapter II
of this Act, and with the duty of religious neutrality under Chapter II of the
Act to foster adherence to State religious neutrality and, in particular, to provide
a framework for requests for accommodations on religious grounds in certain
bodies (chapter R-26.2.01), by the persons subject to that prohibition or
that duty.

  State laicity also requires that all persons have the right to lay parliamentary,
government and judicial institutions, and to lay public services, to the extent
provided for in this Act and in the Act to foster adherence to State religious
neutrality and, in particular, to provide a framework for requests for
accommodations on religious grounds in certain bodies.

5. It is incumbent on the Conseil de la magistrature, with respect to judges
of the Court of Québec, the Human Rights Tribunal, the Professions Tribunal
and the municipal courts, as well as presiding justices of the peace, to establish
rules translating the requirements of State laicity and to ensure their
implementation.

   Despite subparagraph 3 of the second paragraph of section 3, the requirement
to comply with the principles set out in section 2 applies to judges only to the
extent provided for in this section.

CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION ON WEARING RELIGIOUS SYMBOLS

6.  The persons listed in Schedule II are prohibited from wearing religious
symbols in the exercise of their functions.

   A religious symbol, within the meaning of this section, is any object,
including clothing, a symbol, jewellery, an adornment, an accessory or
headwear, that

     (1) is worn in connection with a religious conviction or belief; or

     (2) is reasonably considered as referring to a religious affiliation.

CHAPTER III
SERVICES WITH FACE UNCOVERED

7.  For the purposes of this chapter, “personnel member of a body” means a
member of the personnel of a body listed in Schedule I or a person listed in
Schedule III who is considered to be such a member.

8.  Personnel members of a body must exercise their functions with their face
uncovered.

   Similarly, persons who present themselves to receive a service from a
personnel member of a body must have their face uncovered where doing so
is necessary to allow their identity to be verified or for security reasons. Persons
who fail to comply with that obligation may not receive the service requested,
where applicable.

  For the purposes of the second paragraph, persons are deemed to be
presenting themselves to receive a service when they are interacting or
communicating with a personnel member of a body in the exercise of the
personnel member’s functions.

9. Section 8 does not apply to persons whose face is covered for health
reasons or because of a handicap or of requirements tied to their functions or
to the performance of certain tasks.

10. A body listed in Schedule I may require, from any persons or partnerships
with whom or which it enters into a contract, or to whom or which it grants
financial assistance, that members of their personnel exercise their functions
with their face uncovered, if the contract or the granting of financial assistance
is for the provision of services that are inherent in the body’s mission or if the
services are performed in its personnel’s place of work. The same applies to a
parliamentary institution referred to in subparagraph 1 of the second paragraph
of section 3.

CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

11. The provisions of this Act prevail over any contrary provisions of any
subsequent Act, unless such an Act expressly states that it applies despite
this Act.

   The provisions of sections 1 to 3 do not prevail over any contrary provisions
of any previous Act.

12. A minister may, jointly with the minister responsible for the administration
of this Act, verify compliance with the measures set out in this Act within a
body listed in Schedule I or with a person referred to in paragraph 11 of
Schedule III that is under his or her responsibility or jurisdiction. A minister
may also designate, in writing, a person to conduct such verification. At the
request of the minister concerned or the designated person, the body or the
person being verified must send or otherwise make available to the minister or
designated person all documents and information the minister or designated
person considers necessary to conduct the verification.

  The minister concerned may, in writing and within the time he or she
specifies, require the body or the person to take corrective measures, conduct
any appropriate follow-up and comply with any other measure, including
oversight and support measures.

  For the purposes of this section, the following bodies and persons, among
others, are under the jurisdiction of the following ministers:

  (1) the bodies listed in paragraph 5 of Schedule I: the Minister of Municipal
Affairs, Regions and Land Occupancy;

  (2) the bodies listed in paragraph 6 of Schedule I: the Minister of Transport;

   (3) the bodies listed in paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule I: the Minister of
Education, Recreation and Sports or, as applicable, the Minister of Higher
Education, Research, Science and Technology, according to their respective
responsibilities;

  (4) the bodies listed in paragraphs 8 and 13 of Schedule I: the Minister of
Health and Social Services; and

   (5) the bodies listed in paragraph 11 of Schedule I and the person referred
to in paragraph 11 of Schedule III: the Minister of Families, Seniors and the
Status of Women.

   This section does not apply to the parliamentary institutions and judicial
institutions referred to in subparagraph 1 or 3 of the second paragraph of
section 3.

13. It is incumbent on the person exercising the highest administrative
authority, where applicable, over the persons referred to in section 6 or the first
paragraph of section 8 to take the necessary measures to ensure compliance
with the measures set out in those provisions. That function may be delegated
to a person within the same organization.

   The persons referred to in section 6 or the first paragraph of section 8 are,
in the event of failure to comply with the measures set out in those provisions,
subject to a disciplinary measure or, if applicable, to any other measure resulting
from the enforcement of the rules governing the exercise of their functions.

14. No accommodation or other derogation or adaptation, except those
provided for in this Act, may be granted in connection with the provisions
concerning the prohibition on wearing religious symbols or concerning the
obligations relating to services with one’s face uncovered.

15. Where the prohibition on wearing religious symbols applies to a lawyer
or notary referred to in paragraph 8 of Schedule II, the obligation is deemed
to be an integral part of the legal services contract under which the lawyer or
notary acts.

16.   A provision of a collective agreement, group agreement or any other
contract concerning conditions of employment that is incompatible with the
provisions of this Act is absolutely null.

17. Sections 1 to 3 must not be interpreted as requiring an institution referred
to in section 3 to remove or alter an immovable, or movable property adorning
an immovable. However, an institution may, on its own initiative, remove or
alter an immovable or such movable property.

   Nor must those sections be interpreted as affecting toponymy, or the name
of or name used by an institution referred to in section 3.

CHAPTER V
AMENDING PROVISIONS

CHARTER OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS

18. The Charter of human rights and freedoms (chapter C-12) is amended
by inserting the following paragraph after the third paragraph of the preamble:

“Whereas the Québec nation considers State laicity to be of fundamental
importance;”.

19. Section 9.1 of the Charter is amended by inserting “State laicity,” after
“democratic values,” in the first paragraph.

ACT TO FOSTER ADHERENCE TO STATE RELIGIOUS NEUTRALITY
AND, IN PARTICULAR, TO PROVIDE A FRAMEWORK FOR
REQUESTS FOR ACCOMMODATIONS ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS IN
CERTAIN BODIES

20.    The preamble to the Act to foster adherence to State religious neutrality
and, in particular, to provide a framework for requests for accommodations on
religious grounds in certain bodies (chapter R-26.2.01) is repealed.

21.   Section 1 of the Act is amended

  (1) by replacing the first paragraph by the following paragraph:

  “This Act imposes, to the extent it provides for, a duty of religious neutrality
on personnel members of public bodies in the exercise of their functions, in
accordance with the requirements of State laicity.”;

  (2) by striking out the second paragraph.

22.    Section 2 of the Act is amended, in the first paragraph,

   (1) by inserting “, as well as bodies whose capital forms part of the domain
of the State” at the end of subparagraph 2;

  (2) by inserting “and regional” after “municipal” in subparagraph 5;

   (3) by inserting “, the Commission scolaire du Littoral established by the
Act respecting the Commission scolaire du Littoral (1966-1967, chapter 125)”
after “Education Act (chapter I-13.3)” in subparagraph 7;

  (4) by striking out “or any of its committees” in subparagraph 9.

23.    Section 7 of the Act is amended

  (1) by replacing “any person or partnership with whom it has entered” by
“any persons or partnerships with whom or which it enters”;

   (2) by replacing “service contract or subsidy agreement” by “contract, or
to whom or which it grants financial assistance,”;

  (3) by replacing “or agreement relates to” by “or the granting of financial
assistance is for”;

   (4) by replacing “that are performed in its personnel’s place of work” by
“if the services are performed in its personnel’s place of work”.

24.    Section 9 of the Act and Division II of Chapter III of the Act, comprising
section 10, are repealed.

25.    Section 12 of the Act is amended by replacing the second paragraph by
the following paragraph:

  “The guidelines must be made public using the means the Minister considers
appropriate.”

26.    Division IV of Chapter III of the Act, comprising section 15, is repealed.

27.    Section 16 of the Act is repealed.

28.     Section 17 of the Act is amended by replacing the last sentence of the
first paragraph by the following sentences: “That person may delegate the
function to a person within his or her organization. In addition, that person
must designate an accommodation officer within the personnel.”

29.    The Act is amended by inserting the following section after section 17:

   “17.1. No accommodation or other derogation or adaptation, except those
provided for in this Act, may be granted in connection with the provisions of
this Act that concern fulfillment of the duty of religious neutrality.”

30.    Section 19 of the Act is replaced by the following section:

  “19. The minister designated by the Government is responsible for the
administration of this Act.”

CHAPTER VI
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

31.   Section 6 does not apply

  (1) to persons referred to in any of paragraphs 2, 3, 7 and 9 of Schedule II
on 27 March 2019, for as long as they exercise the same function within the
same organization;

  (2) to persons referred to in paragraph 4 or 5 of Schedule II on 27 March 2019,
until the end of their mandate;

   (3) to persons, except the Minister of Justice and Attorney General, referred
to in paragraph 6 of Schedule II on 27 March 2019, for as long as they exercise
the same function and are under the authority of the same organization;

  (4) to persons referred to in paragraph 8 of Schedule II acting in accordance
with a legal services contract entered into before 16 June 2019, unless the
contract is renewed after that date;

   (5) to persons referred to in paragraph 10 of Schedule II on 27 March 2019,
for as long as they exercise the same function within the same school board.

32. Until the Government makes an order designating a minister responsible
for the administration of this Act and the Act to foster adherence to State
religious neutrality and, in particular, to provide a framework for requests for
accommodations on religious grounds in certain bodies (chapter R-26.2.01),
the Minister of Immigration, Diversity and Inclusiveness is responsible for
their administration.

33. This Act and the amendments made by it to the Act to foster adherence
to State religious neutrality and, in particular, to provide a framework for
requests for accommodations on religious grounds in certain bodies apply
despite sections 1 to 38 of the Charter of human rights and freedoms
(chapter C-12).

34. This Act and the amendments made by Chapter V of this Act have effect
notwithstanding sections 2 and 7 to 15 of the Constitution Act, 1982 (Schedule B
to the Canada Act, chapter 11 in the 1982 volume of the Acts of the Parliament
of the United Kingdom).

35. The minister designated by the Government is responsible for the
administration of this Act.

36.   This Act comes into force on 16 June 2019.

SCHEDULE I
(Sections 3, 7 and 10)

BODIES

(1) government departments;

(2) budget-funded bodies, bodies other than budget-funded bodies and
government enterprises listed in Schedules 1 to 3 to the Financial Administration
Act (chapter A-6.001), including the persons listed in those schedules, as well
as bodies whose capital forms part of the domain of the State;

(3) bodies and persons whose personnel is appointed in accordance with the
Public Service Act (chapter F-3.1.1);

(4) government agencies listed in Schedule C to the Act respecting the process
of negotiation of the collective agreements in the public and parapublic sectors
(chapter R-8.2), including the persons listed in that schedule;

(5) municipalities, metropolitan communities, intermunicipal boards and
municipal and regional housing bureaus, except municipalities governed by
the Cree Villages and the Naskapi Village Act (chapter V-5.1) or the Act
respecting Northern villages and the Kativik Regional Government
(chapter V-6.1);

(6) public transit authorities, the Autorité régionale de transport métropolitain
and any other operator of a shared transportation system;

(7) school boards established under the Education Act (chapter I-13.3), the
Commission scolaire du Littoral established by the Act respecting the
Commission scolaire du Littoral (1966-1967, chapter 125), the Comité de
gestion de la taxe scolaire de l’île de Montréal, general and vocational colleges
established under the General and Vocational Colleges Act (chapter C-29), and
university-level educational institutions listed in paragraphs 1 to 11 of section 1
of the Act respecting educational institutions at the university level
(chapter E-14.1);

(8) public institutions governed by the Act respecting health services and social
services (chapter S-4.2), except public institutions referred to in Parts IV.1
and IV.3 of that Act, joint procurement groups referred to in section 435.1 of
that Act, and health communication centres referred to in the Act respecting
pre-hospital emergency services (chapter S-6.2);

(9) bodies the majority of whose members are appointed by the National
Assembly;

(10) inquiry commissions established under the Act respecting public inquiry
commissions (chapter C-37);

(11) childcare centres, home childcare coordinating offices and subsidized day
care centres governed by the Educational Childcare Act (chapter S-4.1.1);

(12) institutions accredited for the purposes of subsidies under the Act
respecting private education (chapter E-9.1), and institutions whose instructional
program is the subject of an international agreement within the meaning of the
Act respecting the Ministère des Relations internationales (chapter M-25.1.1); and

(13) private institutions under agreement, intermediary resources and
family-type resources governed by the Act respecting health services and social
services.

SCHEDULE II
(Sections 6, 15 and 31)

PERSONS SUBJECT TO THE PROHIBITION ON WEARING RELIGIOUS
SYMBOLS IN THE EXERCISE OF THEIR FUNCTIONS

(1) the President and Vice-Presidents of the National Assembly;

(2) administrative justices of the peace referred to in section 158 of the Courts
of Justice Act (chapter T-16), special clerks, clerks, deputy clerks, sheriffs and
deputy sheriffs referred to in sections 4 to 5 of that Act, clerks and deputy
clerks referred to in section 57 of the Act respecting municipal courts
(chapter C-72.01), and bankruptcy registrars;

(3) members or commissioners, as applicable, who exercise their functions
within the Comité de déontologie policière, the Commission d’accès à
l’information, the Commission de la fonction publique, the Commission de
protection du territoire agricole du Québec, the Commission des transports du
Québec, the Commission municipale du Québec, the Commission québécoise
des libérations conditionnelles, the Régie de l’énergie, the Régie des alcools,
des courses et des jeux, the Régie des marchés agricoles et alimentaires du
Québec, the Régie du bâtiment du Québec, the Régie du logement, the Financial
Markets Administrative Tribunal, the Administrative Tribunal of Québec or the
Administrative Labour Tribunal, as well as disciplinary council chairs who
exercise their functions within the Bureau des présidents des conseils de
discipline;

(4) commissioners appointed by the Government under the Act respecting
public inquiry commissions (chapter C-37), and lawyers or notaries acting for
such a commission;

(5) arbitrators appointed by the Minister of Labour whose name appears on a
list drawn up by that minister in accordance with the Labour Code (chapter C-27);

(6) the Minister of Justice and Attorney General, the Director of Criminal and
Penal Prosecutions, and persons who exercise the function of lawyer, notary
or criminal and penal prosecuting attorney, including legal managers who
supervise the work of those persons or of other legal managers, and who are
under the authority of a government department, the Director of Criminal and
Penal Prosecutions, the National Assembly, a person appointed or designated
by the National Assembly to an office under its authority, a body referred to
in paragraph 3, the Autorité des marchés financiers, the Autorité des marchés
publics, the Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse,
Revenu Québec or a body or person whose personnel is appointed in accordance
with the Public Service Act (chapter F-3.1.1), except the Centre de services
partagés du Québec, the Conseil de gestion de l’assurance parentale, the Institut
de la statistique du Québec, La Financière agricole du Québec, the Société
d’habitation du Québec and Transition énergétique Québec;

(7) persons who exercise the function of lawyer and are employed by a
prosecutor referred to in paragraph 2 or 3 of article 9 of the Code of Penal
Procedure (chapter C-25.1), unless the prosecutor is referred to in paragraph 6,
when those persons are acting in criminal or penal matters for a prosecutor
before the courts or with third persons;

(8) lawyers or notaries acting before the courts or with third persons in
accordance with a legal services contract entered into with a minister, the
Director of Criminal and Penal Prosecutions, the National Assembly, a person
appointed or designated by the National Assembly to exercise a function under
its authority, a body referred to in paragraph 3, the Autorité des marchés
financiers, the Autorité des marchés publics, the Commission des droits de la
personne et des droits de la jeunesse, Revenu Québec, a body or person whose
personnel is appointed in accordance with the Public Service Act, except the
Centre de services partagés du Québec, the Conseil de gestion de l’assurance
parentale, the Institut de la statistique du Québec, La Financière agricole du
Québec, the Société d’habitation du Québec and Transition énergétique Québec,
or lawyers acting in criminal or penal matters before the courts or with third
persons in accordance with a legal services contract entered into with a
prosecutor referred to in paragraph 7;

(9) peace officers who exercise their functions mainly in Québec; and

(10) principals, vice principals and teachers of educational institutions under
the jurisdiction of a school board established under the Education Act
(chapter I-13.3) or of the Commission scolaire du Littoral established by the
Act respecting the Commission scolaire du Littoral (1966-1967, chapter 125).

SCHEDULE III
(Section 7)

PERSONS CONSIDERED TO BE PERSONNEL MEMBERS OF A BODY
FOR THE PURPOSES OF MEASURES RELATING TO SERVICES WITH
FACE UNCOVERED

(1) Members of the National Assembly;

(2) elected municipal officers, except those of municipalities governed by the
Cree Villages and the Naskapi Village Act (chapter V-5.1) or by the Act
respecting Northern villages and the Kativik Regional Government
(chapter V-6.1);

(3) office staff within the meaning of Division II.2 of the Executive Power Act
(chapter E-18), office staff and Members’ staff within the meaning of
Division III.1 of Chapter IV of the Act respecting the National Assembly
(chapter A-23.1), and office staff referred to in section 114.4 of the Cities and
Towns Act (chapter C-19);

(4) commissioners of school boards established under the Education Act
(chapter I-13.3) and the manager and assistant manager appointed under
section 4 of the Act respecting the Commission scolaire du Littoral (1966-1967,
chapter 125);

(5) National Assembly personnel members and Lieutenant-Governor staff
members;

(6) persons appointed or designated by the National Assembly to an office
under its authority and the personnel directed by them;

(7) commissioners appointed by the Government under the Act respecting
public inquiry commissions (chapter C-37) and the personnel directed by them;

(8) persons appointed by the government or by a minister to exercise an
adjudicative function within the administrative branch, including arbitrators
whose name appears on a list drawn up by the Minister of Labour in accordance
with the Labour Code (chapter C-27);

(9) peace officers who exercise their functions mainly in Québec;

(10) physicians, dentists and midwives, when those persons are practising in
a centre operated by a public institution referred to in paragraph 8 of Schedule I;

(11) persons recognized as subsidized home childcare providers under the
Educational Childcare Act (chapter S-4.1.1) and the persons directed by them;

(12) directors or members of a body referred to in any of paragraphs 1 to 9 of
Schedule I who receive remuneration from the body other than the reimbursement
of their expenses, except persons who are elected;

(13) any other persons appointed or designated by the National Assembly, the
Government or a minister, when those persons are exercising functions assigned
to them by the National Assembly, the law, the Government or the minister.
